---
date: '• October 1988'
location: '• Indonesian Business Advisory'
---

Cameron visits Jim Castle, a financial consultant, in his office. Jim
says he had talked to Syd the previous evening, who vouched for him as a
"straight shooter". Jim takes a binder of photo copies from the
bookshelf behind his desk. It contains clippings by "Our Reporter" of
sex-crime stories faithfully translated to preserve the tone and
cultural references. Jim claims that Syd is, or more accurately was, the
most knowledgeable and insightful foreign journalist in Indonesian
history. Jim elaborates on Syd's comments that the coming capital-market
deregulation will provide endless opportunity for scams and corruption.
His task now is to help the family owned enterprises he has advised for
years to "go public" and attract foreign investment. Foreigners are now
approaching these companies to help them inflate their actual worth,
often by enlisting the support of a senior military officer, and drive
up the initial offering price. The foreigners and military silent
partner will then cash out on the first days, leaving the company and
stockholders holding the bag. As Cameron leaves, he notices that another
company shares office space. Jim tells him it is Indonesian Aviation
Services, owned by the same person that is his local partner. Cameron
sees an office-door nameplate "Frank Reuneker", and remembers the name
"George Reuneker" from his library research. Jim says that yes, Frank is
the son of an Air Force officer and offers to introduce him.
