---
identifier: bc888b6e
title: Non Stop to Jogja
date: 21 September 1947 
location: RI-002
---

``` {.synopsis}
    RI-002 returns to Jogja, flying non-stop to conceal the presence of Captain Espina. They reach Java after dusk, with landmarks difficult to discern in the gloom. After some hesitation, during which tension rises in the cockpit, Muharto draws upon a vivid schoolboy memory to identify a range of hills and guides the aircraft to Jogja.
```

RI-002 returns to Jogja with their clandestine passenger, Captain
Espina. The need for secrecy compels Freeberg to fly non-stop from the
southernmost military airfield in the Philippines to Jogjakarta. Bob
installs a spare fuel tank, but high winds deplete the reserve delay
contact with Java until after dark. Muharto has difficulty identifying
landmarks in the gloom, and tension mounts in the cabin as the fuels
gauges slide toward empty. Finally, Muharto draws on the vivid schoolboy
memory of his classmates describing a range of low, rounded hills near
Jogja as female breasts. He orients himself by the landmark geographic
feature and guides Bob to a safe landing in Jogja. RI-002 flies between
the volcanic peaks of Java, which throw ominous shadows over the land in
as the sun sets. Since the presence of Captain Espina could not be
revealed, RI-002 was forced to fly non-stop from Manila, extending the
range with a spare fuel tank installed in the cargo hold. That was now
empty, as well as the wing tanks. Freeberg asks Muharto to identify
landmarks with increasing urgency. Muharto peers out the window, unsure
of what can barely make out in the gathering gloom. Finally, Freeberg
almost shouts: "Dammit Muharto! Where are we? You should know! This is
your country!" A nervous laugh escapes Muharto's lips, as usual for an
embarrassed Javanese person. Muharto looks out the cockpit window again,
and again laughs, this time in delight at a schoolboy memory. Muharto
has spotted a line of low, rounded hills that he and his school mates
called, naturally, the "Susu Seribu", the Thousand Breasts. With this
vivid memory trigger Muharto can clearly visualize the relevant page in
his school atlas. Now with authority in his voice, he tells Freeberg:
"Fly toward those hills, turn to the west and follow them until the last
one, then turn back north and fly for 30 kilometers." A few minutes
later, RI-002 lands in Maguwo, the engines sputtering to a halt as it
rolls along the runway.

Finally, in September we flew back to Jogja. Boedi tells of tension in
the cockpit as Muharto prevaricates. Then finally, Muharto comes
through. He asks Boedi about the hills in front of them. They agree they
are the susu seribut that they tittered over in middle school. We
arrived long after dark. We could not announce our arrival. Our radio
was working, but the spare parts needed for the base radio was our cargo
cabin. As we approached, all the lights in the city flickered out. Then
points of light, flashlights pointed skyward, appeared throughout the
town. These were Dutch sympathizers, signaling what they thought was a
Dutch aircraft, a reminder that not all Indonesians were on our side. We
had to get the runway lights on. I told Bob about the signal a CALI crew
had used on the first blockade run, playing with the propeller pitch and
speed controls to produce an undulating drone, like a low-pitched siren.
Bob did this, and a few moments later the runway lights blazed on, and
we landed.
