In 2018, Maria, a recent college graduate, attends the funeral of her beloved grandfather, Hermann, in the Netherlands. Hermann, who had reached grand age of 95, had been a skilled and passionate pilot
in his youth, but had abandoned aviation entirely when he returned from a tour of duty as a fighter pilot in the East Indies. At the reception following the funeral, Maria is introduced a fellow veteran of the East Indies conflict, Paul Verspoor, who reveals that Hermann had been obsessed with hunting down the most notorious blockade runner, the American veteran Bob Freeberg who piloted RI-002, the first aircraft registered to the Republic of Indonesia.   

A few weeks later, Maria begins a one-year internship at the new 25-story national library in Jakarta. Her assignment is to assist in cataloging and preserving many thousands of private papers, audio tapes, and films recently donated to the library by private collectors. Her colleague is Bintang, a geeky library staff member in his mid-20s who will handle the technical process of digitizing the material. Both work under the supervision of Frans, a former journalist with extensive experience in document and photograph archiving.

Maria soon come across a collection of documents, photos, and video tapes of Indonesian, Dutch, and American witnesses labeled “Blockade Runners”. The collection, dating from the mid 1980s, is low on the roster of documents to be cataloged. Believing that the collection might contain information about her grandfather's experiences, Maria convinces Frans to let her peruse the collection in her spare time. 

During the following weeks, the taped recollections of the interviewees and accompanying photographs and documents will evoke for Maria vivid images of daring exploits in the sky, and stoic endurance of privation on the ground. Bob Freeberg and RI-002 feature prominently in the collections. Maria will learn the story of Bob Freeberg and RI-002. Two retired Indonesian Air Force officers, Petit Muharto and Boediardjo, who served on RI-002, will tell of the essential contribution of Freeberg to the Republic. The recollections of Julius Tahija, adjutant to Dutch military commander Simon Spoor, will illustrate the colonial government's efforts to stop the blockade runs by any means. Through this vivid evocations of the experiences, Maria will see the physical and financial stresses of blockade running transform Bob Freeberg from a passionate, optimistic adventurer to a haggard, disillusioned cynic who disappeared, along with his aircraft, crew, and a fortune in gold, after 16 months of flying in support of the struggle for independence.

The collection also includes documents pertaining to the unsuccessful efforts of Petit Muharto to solve the mystery of the disappearance of RI-002. In a quixotic quest to honor the memory of his friend and comrade, Muharto researched archives and interviewed dozens of witnesses, including the families of the RI-002 members who perished on the final flight. But Muharto was stymied at every turn by a paucity of verifiable sources and the outright reluctance of Air Force officials to discuss the case. 



As he digs through the material and discovers the results of investigations undertaken three decades before, Bintang becomes convinced that RI-002 had crashed with the gold, and the remote crash site looted years later by an elite military unit. Maria argues that ``
Maria, on the other hand, accepts Muharto's conclusion that Spoor intercepted RI-002 to steal the gold to fund a coup.

Both of these interpretations are problematical. During that year the governments of the Netherlands and Indonesia were engaged in sensitive negotiations for atrocities committed on both sides. The Dutch did not want revelations of a rogue military, and the Indonesians don't want stories about the military desecrating a grave of   

It was plain old corruption. Everyone involved was paid to keep their mouths shut. Hermann went along because he wanted to be the one to take down Bob Freeberg.