Muharto takes Cameron to a long-overdue reunion with Boediardjo, the
radio operator of RI-002. The two old comrades revel in recounting their
experiences on RI-002, and Boedi tells Cameron of some RI-002 missions
that Muharto did not participate in.

**In a flashback to** Bob and Boedi fly ten paratroopers to be dropped
near an insurgent stronghold in the forests of Kalimantan. None have
jumped before, or even been in a aircraft, so tension is high. There is
an uproar as the parachute of one trooper opens and dumps onto the cabin
floor. The trooper swears it was an accident, but all others accuse him
of cowardice. The troopers look at each other, wondering if any one will
be next. Boedi enters the cabin. Though he is only an airman, the
charismatic Boedi takes command of the situation, assuring the troopers
that Bob has much wartime experience flying paratroopers and will drop
them safely. He goes to the cockpit and talks with Bob for a moment. The
Bob turns the aircraft over to his co pilot, leaves his seat and stands
in the doorway, his body filling the frame. With Boedi translating, Bob
assures the troops that he has done this many times during the war, and
will drop them exactly on the requested target. Emboldened by Bobs air
of quiet competence, each trooper moves forward and shakes Bobs hand.
Bob returns to his seat, the dropmaster issues the command to jump, and
the cabin empties, save for the dropmaster and a lone recruit wondering
what fate is in store for him back at Maguwo. Boedi watches as the
parachutes drift down and land are enveloped by the endless forest.
Boedi asks Bob how many paradrops he made. Bob grins and answers: "None.
I was a Navy pilot. All my missions were over water."

**In a flashback to** Bob flies two Indonesian aviators, Halim and
Iswandi, to Bangkok. to purchase a twin-prop airplane that will become
RI-003. Dutch authorities pressure the Thai government to detain
Freeberg as a blockade runner. The Thais briefly detain Freeberg in a
comfortable hotel room, but the Indonesian crew must find their own
accommodation. They can only afford rooms in a bar district. Boedi is
delighted, but Halim and Iswandi are appalled. Both are engaged to be
married, and worry that the families of their respective fianc√©es will
learn that they have stayed in such a disreputable environment.

**Returning to the interview** Julia is intrigued about Emeria, so she
does some research in Dutch-language art publications. Learns she was
the first Indonesian painter of modern art and a socialite with contacts
at the highest levels in both Dutch and Indonesian society.

**In a flashback to** Victor marches off a troop ship with other
conscripts. While waiting for transport to the barracks, Victor
photographs a paper boy, then buys a newspaper from him seconds before
the police chase the boy away. The other soldiers gather around Victor
as he reads aloud in Dutch what is obviously Indonesian-language text,
occasionally pausing to look up a word in a Dutch-Malay pocket
dictionary.

**In a flashback to** Victor's familiarity with photography gains him a
plum assignment to the Mapping Dept, where he develops and classifies
photographs taken by field surveyors. Several of the Indonesian map
makers are amateur artists, and so Victor is invited to accompany them
to the exhibitions of Batavia's vibrant arts scene. At an event
featuring the flamboyant Dutch artist Auke Sonnega, the artist overhears
Victor giving astute criticism of his paintings. He introduces himself
and suggests Victor write up some notes and send them, along with the
photos, to a friend who works for the Bataviaasch Nieuwsblad newspaper.
Victor becomes a regular contributor to the paper, covering the arts
circuit and doing photographic essays on street life, all while
concealing his status as a KNIL recruit.

**In a flashback to** When Victor arrives at work on day, he sees a
sealed envelope on his desk that he knows to be reassignment orders. He
opens the envelope with dread, certain that he is being sent to a combat
unit. But the orders are for Victor to report to KNIL headquarters,
where he will work with Spoors intelligence unit.

**In a flashback to** Victor attends a solo exhibition by Emeria at the
Kuntskring. She lays on the charm, and he promises to write a review of
her work in the BN.

Through Emeria, Victor meets prominent Republican figures, who Spoor and
the colonial government seek to portray as opportunistic thugs and
bandits. Victor is astounded to discover that most are well-educated
with sophisticated and pragmatic political beliefs.
