**Returning to modern-day interview ** Cameron Bishop, an American
journalism student interning at the Jakarta Post, calls on retired Air
Force Major Petit Muharto to interview him about his experiences flying
blockade runs with Bob Freeberg in his war-surplus Dakota registered to
the new Republic of Indonesia as RI-002. Muharto begins with the
surprising message he received at his desk at Maguwo air base in
Jogjakarta.

**In a flashback to 8 June 1947 ** Muharto receives a message flown by
airborne military courier from Pang Soeparto, an army lieutenant
stationed in Tasikmalaya. The message contains the news that a foreign
pilot had landed an unmarked cargo aircraft on a nearby beach and,
astoundingly, had asked for Muharto by name. Muharto takes this
information to his commander, Suryadarma, who agrees that the matter is
worth investigation.

\*\* 8 june 1947 Over Java\*\* Muharto flies to Tasikmalaya in an
open-cockpit Japanese monoplane. During the flight, he wonders which of
the blockade-running pilots he might be, The first two had been routine
commercial runs, with even a flight attendent. His thoughts drift to the
last, and most eventful blockade run two months before. This aircraft, a
Nikosoren, was one of a score barely servicable planes the Japanese had
left behind. The air force mechanics kept these aircraft flying through
skill and guesswork, but Muharto was aware that any flight could end in
disaster. To keep his mind from this eventuality, Muharto thought about
the American pilots he had met during the blockade runs he had organized
from Singapore to Jogjakarta. He decided that only Bob Freeberg
possessed the skill and nerve to land at night on a remote beach. Bob
had been the pilot of the third blockade run. Though these had been
standard charter flights -- they even had a flight attendant, a lovely
Filipina named Miss Brown -- the third flight would test the skills of
any aviator.

**Returning to modern-day interview ** Muharto tells Cameron that he
thought back

**In a flashback to 31 March 1947 ** Muharto leads a blockade run with
Bob Freeberg, then a contract pilot for a Manila-based charter airline,
as captain. Amid poor visibility over Java, Bob demonstrates his
piloting skill by diving through a break in the clouds, leveling off
under the cloud cover a few hundred meters above the ground. Muharto
spots a railway line, and tells Bob that it leads along the valley to
terminate in Jogja. Bob follows the line, barely visible through the
rain, while Muharto desperately tries to remember if there is a tunnel
between their current location and Jogjakarta.

\*\* 31 March 1947 Maguwo\*\* Suryadarma tells Muharto that this will be
his last blockade run. An Indian businessman has offered to link India
with the Republic with his own Dakota, registered as VT-CLA. He has the
full support of the Indian government, so further chartered runs will
not be necessary. Muharto is disappointed, but this will be memorable,
as Suryadarma asks Bob to make a couple of detours on the way back to
Singapore. Bob cheerfully agrees.

\*\* 31 March 1947 Karangendah\*\* Engines roaring with reversed props,
Bob makes a spectacular landing on a refurbished Japanese airstrip at
Karangendah on the grasslands of south Sumatra. Santoso, the base
commander climbs aboard to meet them. After a short conversation,
Santoso exits, and Bob takes off, the wheels finally lifting off the
runway a few meters before the end.

\*\* \*\* Muharto and Pang marvel that the pilot had been able to land
on this short stretch of beach, bookended by high bluffs. Muharto
recognizes Freeberg and they greet as friends. Fearing that a patrolling
Dutch fighter could appear at any time, Muharto, in a stirring speech,
implores the assembled villagers to tear apart their houses to fashion
an improvised runway from the bamboo mats used as walls. They do so, and
with Muharto and Pang on board, the Dakota takes off and flies to
Maguwo.

\*\* 8 June 1947 Maguwo\*\* Suryadarma commissions Bob to fly a cargo of
high-value quinine to Manila and return with essential medicines and
spare parts. Muharto expresses concern about the reception that might
await unmarked aircraft carrying high-value goods into Manila. He
suggests that they paint a fictitious registration number onto the tail.
After some debate, Muharto, Bob, and Suryadarma agree on "RI-002",
reserving "RI-001" for a future presidential aircraft.

**Returning to modern-day interview ** Cameron writes up the interview,
and gives it to Sabam Siagian, who grudgingly approves. He passes it to
Syd Jardine, who remarks that Freeberg comes off as a "super-pilot" and
not believable. He suggests Cameron find other accounts of Bob by
researching in the reference section of the newly opened National
Library.

**The following day ** Cameron uses his Jakarta Post credentials to
enter the reference section. Julia Suryakusuma, the only staffer
speaking fluent English, is assigned to fetch the material he needs from
the stacks. Julia returns with an armload of books, and Cameron begins
reading. Skimming through the supplementary background material Julia
selected, Cameron's attention is drawn to a passage in a book by British
diplomat John Coast about meeting Bob in Bukittinggi.

**In a flashback to May 1948 ** John Coast and Dave Fowler watch as the
starboard landing gear on RI-002 slowly collapses from hydraulic system
failure. Bob emerges from the cockpit and admits that the craft is
suffering from the wear-and-tear of past months, especially repeated
landings on rough jungle airstrips. But he is waiting for the
Indonesians to pay him the huge debt they owe so he can do the
much-needed repairs. Coast tells Bob that he is welcome to fly for his
company, POAS, if RI-002 becomes too dangerous. Bob thanks him, but
insists that he will find a way to fix his beloved Dakota.

**Returning to modern-day interview ** After hours of research, Cameron
asks Julia where he can get a cup of coffee. Julia invites him to join
her at the library canteen. Julia tells Cameron of her dream of securing
a scholarship to pursue post-graduate studies in America. Cameron
attempts, in turn, to tell of his dreams of becoming an international
investigative journalist. But Julia stops him, saying, with a
mischievious smile, that if she wants to know anything about him she
will simply ask her father, who is a senior officer in military
intelligence.

\*\* \*\* Muharto visits to personally thank Sabam and Cameron for the
article, and to tell them that he has been bombarded with calls from old
friends asking about what happened to the gold. Syd Jardine says that
since unloading a quarter ton of gold would require considerable
resources, discovering who might have had the motivation and ability to
transport and sell the gold could solve the mystery of RI-002. Muharto
agrees, and Cameron eagerly offers to help. Sabam gives his grudging
assent, but reminds Cameron that the Jakarta Post cannot be involved,
and he must to any research on his own time.
