On the evening of 7 June 1947 Bob Freeberg lands his unmarked Dakota
cargo plane on remote Cilotok beach in southwest Java, the huge aircraft
shuddering to a stop a few meters from a cliff at one end. Villagers
appear, marveling at this colossus from the sky. They are friendly and
offer Bob and his two Filipino crew members food and a place to sleep.
But the following morning, Indonesian soldiers appear. One points to the
lack of registration on the Dakotas tail and shouts "*Mata-Mata*!",
"Spy!" They point their rifles directly at Bob. He replies with the only
words they might understand, a name: "Captain Petit Muharto"

On 25 September 1988, Cameron Bishop, an American journalism student
interning at the Jakarta Post as a copy editor, visits the Muharto
Residence to interview Air Force Major Petit Muharto, an old friend of
his editor, Sabam Siagian, about his experiences flying blockade runs
with Bob Freeberg. Muharto begins with the surprising message he
received at his desk at Maguwo air base in Jogjakarta.

**In a flashback to** On 8 June 1947, Muharto receives a message from
Pang Soeparto, an army lieutenant stationed in Tasikmalaya informing him
that a foreign pilot had landed an unmarked cargo aircraft on a nearby
beach and, astoundingly, had asked for Muharto by name. Muharto takes
this information to his commander, Suryadarma, who tells him to fly to
Tasik and find out which of Muharto's "foreign flyboy friends" it is.

**Returning to the interview** Muharto tells Cameron that at
Tasikmalaya, Pang Suparto confirmed that it was indeed Bob Freeberg
stuck on the beach. They loaded two barrels of aviation fuel into a jeep
and drove to the coast.

**In a flashback to** Arriving at Cilotok Beach, Muharto and Pang marvel
that Freeberg had been able to land on this short stretch of sand,
bookended by high bluffs. Muharto recognizes Freeberg and they greet as
friends. Fearing that a patrolling Dutch fighter could appear at any
time, Muharto, in a stirring speech, implores the assembled villagers to
tear apart their houses to fashion an improvised runway from the bamboo
mats used as walls. They do so, and with Muharto and Pang on board, the
Dakota takes off and flies to Maguwo.

**In a flashback to** At Maguwo Suryadarma commissions Bob to fly a
cargo of high-value quinine to Manila and return with essential
medicines and spare parts. Muharto expresses concern about the reception
that might await unmarked aircraft carrying high-value goods into
Manila. He suggests that they paint a fictitious registration number
onto the tail. After some debate, Muharto, Bob, and Suryadarma agree on
"RI-002", reserving "RI-001" for a future presidential aircraft.

**Returning to the interview** Muharto tells Cameron that he flew to
Tasikmalaya on a Nikosoren, was one of a score barely serviceable planes
the Japanese had left behind. The air force mechanics kept these
aircraft flying through skill and guesswork, but Muharto was aware that
any flight could end in disaster. To keep his mind from this
eventuality, Muharto thought about the American pilots he had met during
the blockade runs he had organized from Singapore to Jogjakarta. He
decided that only Bob Freeberg possessed the skill and nerve to land at
night on a remote beach. Bob had been the pilot of the third blockade
run. Though these had been standard charter flights -- they even had a
flight attendant, a lovely Filipina named Miss Brown -- the third flight
would test the skills of any aviator.

**In a flashback to** On 31 March 1947, Muharto stands in the cockpit of
a Dakota behind Bob Freeberg, then a contract pilot for CALI, a
Manila-based charter airline, as captain. Amid poor visibility over
Java, Bob demonstrates his piloting skill by diving through a break in
the clouds, leveling off under the cloud cover a few hundred meters
above the ground. Muharto spots a railway line, and tells Bob that it
leads along the valley to terminate in Jogja. Bob follows the line,
barely visible through the rain, and jokingly asks Muharto if there are
any tunnels between here the Jogja. The look on Muharto's face suggests
that he is not entirely sure.

**Returning to the interview** Muharto tells Cameron that they landed in
Manila without incident. However, the Dutch diplomats there claimed the
quinine cargo as Dutch property, and took them to court.

**In a flashback to** On 20 June 1947, Bob and Muharto defend their
claim over the quinine in a Manila courtroom. Their lawyer, Salipada
Penatun, who is also a sitting senator with extensive high-level
contacts, lays out the legal justification for ownership of the quinine,
then lets Muharto give an impassioned plea, claiming that the money from
selling the quinine will buy medicines and other essentials unavailable
in the besieged capital. The Dutch counter by calling a plantation
expert to testify that the Republic does not have the capability to
process quinine, so the drug must have been produced in a Dutch-owed
factory before the war. Muharto jumps to his feet, ready to protest this
insult to his people's technological skill, but Penatun motions for him
to sit down, then calmly tells the judge: "A foreigner is not qualified
to discuss the internal matters of the sovereign Republic of Indonesia."
The judge considers this with some sympathy, declines to allow the
expert witness, and adjourns the session.

**Returning to the interview** Muharto tells Cameron that he, Boedi and
Pang were penniless as they waited for the verdict to be handed down.
Bob found them simple accommodation in a boarding house, and bought them
a single meal each day at the cheapest eatery in Manila.

**In a flashback to** At the Madras Curry Restaurant, Muharto protests
as Bob again picks up the bill for their bowls of curry. But Bob insists
that as captain of RI-002 he is responsible for their well-being until
he returns them safely to Java.

**In a flashback to** On 29 July 1947 Bob invites Muharto, Pang, and
Boedi to his apartment to celebrate that morning's verdict awarding the
quinine to them. Bob's house mate has a military-grade, full-spectrum
short-wave radio, which Boedi immediately switches on and scans the
military and civilian frequencies. The party mood vanishes when a news
broadcast announces that an Indian blockade runner had been shot down on
approach to Maguwo. All look toward Bob, and he nods in acknowledgement
that RI-002 might be the last remaining hope to connect the Republic
with the rest of the world.

**Returning to the interview** Muharto tells Cameron that they finally
managed to sell the quinine in September and return to Java. For
security reasons RI-002 had to make the trip non-stop, which left them
dangerously low on fuel as they reached Java.

**In a flashback to** On the evening of 21 September 1947 aboard RI-002,
Muharto has difficulty identifying landmarks in the gloom. Tension
mounts in the cabin as the fuels gauges slide toward empty. Bob
admonishes Muharto saying: "This is your country, you should now where
we are." Muharto draws on the vivid schoolboy memory of his classmates
describing a range of low, rounded hills near Jogja as female breasts.
He soon spots the distinctive geographic feature and, now oriented,
guides Bob to a safe landing in Jogja.

**In a flashback to** The following day Muharto takes Bob for an
afternoon walk to introduce him to Jogja, and they visit the palace of
the former Dutch governor, now repurposed as the seat of the Indonesian
Republic. As Bob admires the architecture, he is astounded to suddenly
be ushered into the office of President Soekarno. As was his custom in
private conversation, Soekarno treats Bob as an equal and puts him at
ease, imploring the American to do what he can to help the Indonesian
struggle for freedom.

**Returning to the interview** Muharto tells Cameron that Bob did become
an invaluable link between the besieged republic and the outside world,
flying high-value agricultural products to Singapore and Manila, and
returning with medicine and spare parts for vehicles, generators, and
the like. Though essential, the missions were hardly exciting or
glamorous, though there were moments.

**In a flashback to** One day in November 1047, well into the monsoon,
Muharto spots an small airplane near the horizon as they fly near Dutch
territory. This is most likely a Dutch fighter on patrol, so Bob steers
RI-002 into a violent tropical storm. Boedi grins when he sees Muharto's
terrified face as the Dakota is violently buffeted, with sickening
plunges in altitude. Bob tells Muharto to not worry; when a Navy test
pilot he would fly through typhoons.

**In a flashback to** On 30 November 1947 RI-002 takes off from Maguwo
bound for Manila. Bob was flying a team of Republican officials and
technocrats to a United Nation's conference in the Philippines, where
they successfully made the case for Indonesian independence. These
highly educated, cosmopolitan men treat Bob with the same great respect
as do the common people of Jogja.

Muharto tells Cameron that he flew with RI-002 until May 1948, when he
was promoted to major and posted to headquarters. Muharto saw little of
Bob after that, but was looking for forward to having Bob as guest of
honor at this wedding in October.

Muharto tells Cameron that the following afternoon he heard reports that
RI-002 had not arrived at Bukittinggi. In the coming days, the Dutch
denied any knowledge of the disappearance, and the Republic was unable
to mount more than a cursory search. Muharto shows Cameron a clipping
dated 1983 about ratten gatherers finding wreckage on a remote mountain
in South Sumatra. Muharto said that he used his AURI credentials to
research the archives for the investigation report. He found, to his
astonishment, that the wreckage had actually been discovered in April
1977.

**In a flashback to** On 25 April 1977 two wiry men dressed in shabby
clothes lead a squad of airmen and their officer, Lt. Sulaiman, through
a forested hillside of Mount Punggur in South Sumatra to the site of
wreckage of RI-002 they had stumbled upon the previoius week. The airmen
set up camp and search the area. They find fragments of a wing with the
faded letters: RI-00, other airplane parts, including a dynamo with a
bullet wedged between the windings and armature. There are a few
fragments of human remains, which the soldiers reverently dig from the
earth and carefully wrap in cloth. They also find two empty wooden
crates labeled: "Gold", but a thorough search of the area does not find
any trace of the treasure itself.

**In a flashback to** On 29 July 1977 five coffins draped in Indonesian
flags lay on a platform in an otherwise empty hanger at Tanjung Karang
Air Base in Lampung, Sumatra. A sixth coffin, larger than the others and
without a flag, rests on a separate platform. A flatbed truck pulls into
the hanger and a squad of airmen, in silence, pick up each of the
flag-draped coffins and place them on the truck. But they leave the
sixth coffin where it lies as the truck pulls away.

Muharto tells Cameron that the sixth coffin, presumably containing Bobs
remains, could not be buried with the others because he was a foreigner.
Muharto's expression as he finishes his reminiscences convinces Cameron
that he regarded Freeberg as a close friend, and is seeking closure
about his mysterious disappearance. As Cameron rises to leave, Muharto
wonders that if he had turned down promotion and had been with Bob on
the final flight, maybe it would not have ended in tragedy.

The following day in the Jakarta Post Cameron finishes writing up the
interview, and gives it to Sabam Siagian. Sabam glances at the copy,
grunts, then passes the pages to Syd Jardine, the senior copy editor.
Syd reads it carefully, then remarks that Freeberg comes off as a
"super-pilot" and not believable. He suggests Cameron verify Muharto's
accounts by researching in the reference section of the newly opened
National Library for contemporary descriptions of Freeberg.

The following day at the National Library, Cameron uses his Jakarta Post
credentials to gain access to the reference section. Julia Suryakusuma,
an attractive, bookish woman in her early 20s, is the only staffer
speaking fluent English, and so is assigned to fetch the material he
needs from the restricted stacks. Cameron explains his mission, and
Julia disappears into the stacks, returning shortly with a few books
written by foreigners about the period. Skimming through the material,
Cameron's attention is drawn to a passage in a book by British diplomat
John Coast relating events at a gathering of foreign aviators in the
mountain town of Bukittinggi, a Republican base of operations.

**In a flashback to** On the evening of 1 May 1948 in the ballroom of
what used to be the Dutch governor's palace in Bukittinggi, Richard
Cobley, a semi-piratical British aviator, drunkenly accuses Bob of
taking the best contracts by scaring off others by exaggerating the
danger. Later, while Bob stumbles along an unlit path to his lodgings,
Cobley confronts him, warning that an "accident" might happen to his
ramshackle Dakota unless he shares the wealth.

On the afternoon of 1 October 1988, Muharto visits the Jakarta Post
newsroom to personally thank Sabam for the article, which had appeared
in that morning's edition. Muharto tells Sabam that he has been
bombarded with calls from old friends asking about what • happened to
the gold.

• Sabam gives his grudging assent, but reminds Cameron that the Jakarta
Post cannot be involved, and he must to any research on his own time.•

The following day, Cameron returns to the National Library to enlist
Julia's assistance in investigating the mystery by researching library
archives. Julia is eager to help, and disappears into the stacks,
emerging with bound volumes of Dutch-language newspapers. She reads
aloud, in English, news articles printed in the days after the
disappearance.

**In a flashback to** On 5 October 1948 at KNIL headquarters, a reporter
from the Bataviaasch Nieuwsblad newspaper accosts General Spoor in the
hallway and badgers him for information of the fate of RI-002. Spoor
claims ignorance, and grows visibly annoyed when the reporter press him,
breaking off the interview and slamming the door to his office.

In the National Library Julia tells Cameron that, by the tone of the
language of the article, the reporter suggested that Spoor was hiding
something. She says they might get more information from Victor de Jong,
a Dutch-born, naturalized Indonesian photographer who consults for the
museum. Victor had been a Dutch conscript assigned to KNIL headquarters
as a photographic assistant analyst and often interacted with Spoor.

The following afternoon, Julia and Cameron enter the IPPHOS office,
located on the ground floor of a building in the old section of Jakarta
and one inspection away from being condemned. An ancient air conditioner
wheezes over a window, barely affecting the heat and humidity. Victor, a
slight, elderly man of sallow complexion, is the only person in the
office and openly delighted at receiving company. Julia introduces
Cameron and explains the purpose of their visit. The negatives and
prints are held in tattered folders placed on shelves seemingly at
random, but Victor strides confidently to a shelf, pulls out a folder
from the middle of a pile, and brings it back to the desk. He leafs
through the folder and pulls out a strip of negatives showing a large
American standing in front of an airplane. It is Bob Freeberg and
RI-002. Victor repeats the process and shows Cameron images of Spoor in
his office.

**In a flashback to** On 20 October 1947 at his desk outside Spoor's
office at KNIL headquarters, Victor raging that the Thai authorities had
released Freeberg.

Victor searches for more shots of Batavia to prod his memory about
Spoor's efforts to stop the blockade runs. He stops when he comes across
a photo of a strikingly beautiful Indonesian woman who radiates elegance
and poise even dressed in paint-splattered overalls. The caption reads
"Emeria Soenassa in her studio 1948". Julia asks Victor who she is.
Victor replies "No one important", snatches the photo from the table and
files it away.

Cameron invites Julia for coffee. She agrees, but only if at a
"respectable" hotel coffee shop. They settle on the nearby Hotel
Borobudur, a favorite of the Jakarta elite. Over coffee Julia tells
Cameron of her dream of securing a scholarship to pursue post-graduate
studies in America. Cameron attempts, in turn, to tell of his dreams of
becoming an international investigative journalist. But Julia stops him,
saying, with a mischievious smile, that if she wants to know anything
about him she will simply ask her father, who is a senior officer in
military intelligence. Cameron puts down his coffee, looks around
involuntarily at the other customers, then tells Julia he should be
getting back to the Jakarta Post,
