On 8 June 1947 Bob Freeberg lands his unmarked Dakota cargo plane on
remote Cilotok beach in southwest Java, the huge aircraft shuddering to
a stop a few meters from a cliff at one end. Villagers appear, marveling
at this colossus from the sky. They are friendly and offer Bob and his
two Filipino crew members food and a place to sleep. But the following
morning, Indonesian soldiers appear. One points to the lack of
registration on the Dakotas tail and shouts "*Mata-Mata*!", "Spy!" They
point their rifles directly at Bob. He replies with the only words they
might understand, a name: "Captain Petit Muharto"

-   2On 25 September 1988, Cameron Bishop, an American journalism
    student interning at The Jakarta Post as a copy editor, sits with
    retired Air Force Major Petit Muharto at his home in Jakarta.
    Muharto had asked his old friend Sabam Siagian, the English-language
    newspaper's managing editor, to publish a story commemorating Bob
    Freeberg on the 40th anniversary of his mysterious disappearance on
    1 October 1948. Muharto begins his narrative by telling Cameron of a
    message he received one morning at his desk in Maguwo air base in
    Jogjakarta.

-   2On 8 June 1947 Muharto is surprised to be given a message from an
    army lieutenant stationed in Tasikmalaya informing him that a
    foreign pilot had landed an unmarked cargo aircraft on a nearby
    beach and, astoundingly, had asked for Muharto by name. Muharto
    takes this information to his commander, Suryadarma, who tells him
    to fly to Tasik and find out which of Muharto's "foreign flyboy
    friends" it is.

-   2On 31 March 1947, Muharto leads a blockade run with Bob Freeberg,
    then a contract pilot for a Manila-based charter airline, as
    captain. Amid poor visibility over Java, Bob demonstrates his
    piloting skill by diving through a break in the clouds, leveling off
    under the cloud cover a few hundred meters above the ground. Muharto
    spots a railway line, and tells Bob that it leads along the valley
    to terminate in Jogja. Bob follows the line, barely visible through
    the rain, and jokingly asks Muharto if there are any tunnels between
    here the Jogja. The look on Muharto's face suggests that he is not
    entirely sure.

-   2Arriving at Cilotok on the afternoon of 9 June 1947, Muharto and
    Pang marvel that Freeberg had been able to land on this short
    stretch of beach, bookended by high bluffs. Muharto recognizes
    Freeberg and they greet as friends. Fearing that a patrolling Dutch
    fighter could appear at any time, Muharto, in a stirring speech,
    implores the assembled villagers to tear apart their houses to
    fashion an improvised runway from the bamboo mats used as walls.
    They do so, and with Muharto and Pang on board, the Dakota takes off
    and flies to Maguwo.

-   2In Maguwo on the evening of 10 June 1947, Suryadarma commissions
    Bob to fly a cargo of high-value quinine to Manila and return with
    essential medicines and spare parts. Muharto expresses concern about
    the reception that might await unmarked aircraft carrying high-value
    goods into Manila. He suggests that they paint a fictitious
    registration number onto the tail. Muharto suggests RI-002. Bob says
    it should be RI-001, as his is the first aircraft. Suryadarma,
    imperiously, states that "RI-001" is reserved for a future
    presidential aircraft. Bob grumbles as Suryadarma issues the order
    to paint the number on the Dakota's tail.

-   2On 21 September 1947, RI-002 returns to Java. For security reasons
    RI-002 had to make the trip non-stop, which left them dangerously
    low on fuel as they reached Java.

In the gathering darkness, Muharto has difficulty identifying landmarks.
Tension mounts in the cabin as the fuels gauges slide toward empty. Bob
admonishes Muharto saying: "This is your country, you should now where
we are!" Muharto draws on the vivid schoolboy memory of his classmates
giggling as they describe a range of low, rounded hills near Jogja as
female breasts. He soon spots the distinctive geographic feature and,
now oriented, guides Bob to a safe landing in Jogja.

-   2In early October 1947, Muharto takes Bob for an afternoon walk to
    show him the town. Bob is impressed at the resilience of the people
    as they struggle with the privation caused by the Dutch blockade.
    They visit the palace of the former Dutch governor, now repurposed
    as the seat of the Indonesian Republic. As Bob admires the
    architecture, he is astounded to suddenly be ushered into the office
    of President Soekarno. As is his custom in private conversation,
    Soekarno treats Bob as an equal and puts him at ease, imploring the
    American to help his people in their struggle for freedom.

-   2In mid November 1947, Muharto spots an small airplane near the
    horizon as they fly near Dutch territory. This is most likely a
    Dutch fighter on patrol, so Bob steers RI-002 into a tropical storm.
    Boedi grins when he sees Muharto's terrified face as the Dakota is
    violently buffeted, with sickening plunges in altitude. Bob tells
    Muharto to not worry; when a Navy test pilot he would fly through
    typhoons.

-   2Shortly before midnight on 30 November 1947, Bob flies a team of
    Republican officials and technocrats from Maguwo to a United
    Nation's conference in the Philippines to make the case for
    Indonesian independence. These highly educated, cosmopolitan men
    treat Bob with the same great respect as do the common people of
    Jogja.

-   2In mid May 1948, Muharto is reluctantly promoted to Major and
    assigned a desk job.

-   2Muharto tells Cameron that on the afternoon of 1 October 1948 he
    heard reports that RI-002 had not arrived at Bukittinggi. In the
    following days, the Dutch denied any knowledge of the disappearance,
    and the Republic was unable to mount more than a cursory search.
    Muharto shows Cameron a clipping dated 1983 about rattan gatherers
    finding wreckage on a remote mountain in South Sumatra. Muharto said
    that he used his AURI credentials to research the archives for the
    investigation report. He found, to his astonishment, that the
    wreckage had actually been discovered in April 1977.

-   2On 17 April 1977, two wiry men dressed in shabby clothes lead a
    squad of airmen and their officer, Lt. Sulaiman, through a forested
    hillside to the wreckage of RI-002. The airmen set up camp and
    search the area. They find fragments of a wing with the faded
    letters: RI-00, other airplane parts, including a dynamo with a
    bullet wedged between the windings and armature. There are a few
    fragments of human remains, which the soldiers reverently dig from
    the earth and carefully wrap in cloth. They also find two empty
    wooden crates labeled: "Gold", but a thorough search of the area
    does not find any trace of the treasure itself.

-   2On 29 July 1977, five coffins draped in Indonesian flags lay on a
    platform in an otherwise empty hanger. A sixth coffin, larger than
    the rest and without a flag, rests on a separate platform. A flatbed
    truck pulls into the hanger and a squad of airmen, in silence, pick
    up each of the flag-draped coffins and place them on the truck. But
    they leave the sixth coffin where it lies as the truck pulls away.

-   2Muharto tells Cameron that the sixth coffin, presumably containing
    Bob's remains, could not be buried with the others because he was a
    foreigner. Muharto's expression as he finishes his reminiscences
    convinces Cameron that he had regarded Freeberg as a close friend,
    and is seeking closure about his mysterious disappearance. As
    Cameron rises to leave, Muharto wonders that if he had turned down
    promotion and had been with Bob on the final flight, maybe it would
    not have ended in tragedy.

-   2On 26 September 1988, Cameron writes up the interview, and gives it
    to managing editor Sabam Siagian, who had given him the assignment.
    Sabam glances at the copy, grunts, then passes the pages to Syd
    Jardine, the senior copy editor. Syd reads it carefully, then
    remarks that Freeberg comes off as a "super-pilot" and not
    believable. He suggests Cameron find other accounts of Bob by
    researching in the reference section of the newly opened National
    Library.

-   2On 27 September 1988, Cameron uses his Jakarta Post credentials to
    gain access to the reference section of the National Library. Julia
    Suryakusuma, an attractive, bookish woman in her early 20s, is the
    only staffer speaking fluent English, and so is assigned to assist
    him, as visitors are now allowing into the stacks. Cameron explains
    his mission, and Julia disappears into the stacks, returning shortly
    with a few books written by foreigners about the period. Skimming
    through the material, Cameron's attention is drawn to a passage in a
    book by British diplomat John Coast relating events at a gathering
    of foreign aviators in the mountain town of Bukittinggi, a
    Republican base of operations.

-   2On the evening of 8 March 1948 in the ballroom of the former Dutch
    governor's palace in Bukittinggi, Richard Cobley drunkenly accuses
    Bob of taking the best blockade-running contracts through his close
    relationship with the Indonesian government. Later, while Bob
    stumbles along an unlit path to his lodgings, Cobley confronts him,
    warning that an "accident" might happen to his ramshackle Dakota
    unless he shares the wealth.

-   2On 2 October 1988, the day after the article is published, Muharto
    visits The Jakarta Post to personally thank Sabam and Cameron. He
    says he he has been bombarded with calls from old Air Force
    comrades, asking about what happened to the gold. Muharto admits
    that he had tried to solve the mystery himself, but had gotten
    nowhere.

-   2In May 1980 Muharto enters a decrepit building housing stacks of
    books...

-   2Syd Jardine says that since unloading a quarter ton of gold would
    require considerable resources, discovering who might have had the
    motivation and ability to transport and sell the gold could solve
    the mystery of RI-002. Muharto agrees, and Cameron eagerly offers to
    help. He tells Muharto that he knows just the person who could help
    them do the research.

-   2On 5 October 1988 Cameron returns to the library to enlist Julia's
    assistance in investigating the mystery by researching library
    archives. Julia is eager to help, and disappears into the stacks,
    emerging with bound volumes of Dutch-language newspapers. She reads
    aloud, in English, some news articles printed in the days after the
    disappearance.

-   2On 5 October 1948 a reporter from the Bataviaasch Nieuwsblad
    newspaper accosts General Spoor in the hallway and badgers him for
    information of the fate of RI-002. Spoor claims ignorance, and grows
    visibly annoyed when the reporter press him, breaking off the
    interview and slamming the door to his office.

-   2Julia notes that the snide tone of the language in the article
    suggests the reporter was convinced that Spoor was hiding something.
    She says they might get more information from Victor de Jong, a
    Dutch-born, naturalized Indonesian photographer who consults for the
    museum. Victor had told Julia that he had been a Dutch conscript
    assigned to KNIL headquarters as an assistant photographic
    technician/analyst reporting directly to Spoor.

-   2In mid October 1988 Julia and Cameron enter the IPPHOS office,
    located on the ground floor of a building in the colonial-era
    section of Jakarta and one municiple inspection away from being
    condemned. An ancient air conditioner wheezes over a window, having
    no discernible effect on the heat and humidity. The office has a
    single occupant: Victor, a slight, elderly man of sallow complexion,
    is the only person in the office who is openly delighted at
    receiving company. Julia introduces Cameron and explains the purpose
    of their visit. The negatives and prints of the collection are
    stored in tattered folders placed seemingly at random, but Victor
    strides confidently to a shelf, pulls out a folder from the middle
    of a pile, and brings it back to the desk. He leafs through the
    folder and pulls out a strip of negatives showing a large American
    standing in front of an airplane. It is Bob Freeberg and RI-002.
    Victor repeats the process and shows Cameron images of Spoor in his
    office. Victor explains that he was a recruit posted to KNIL
    headquarters as an photographer analyst. His desk was close to
    Spoor's office, and remembers on many occasion overhearing Spoor
    raging about the foreign pilots running the Dutch blockade with
    impunity.

-   2Victor searches for more shots of Batavia to prod his memory about
    Spoor's efforts to stop the blockade runs. He stops when he comes
    across a photo of a strikingly beautiful Indonesian woman who,
    though dressed in baggy, paint-splattered overalls radiates elegance
    and poise. The caption reads "Emeria Soenassa in her studio 1948".
    Julia asks Victor who she is. Victor replies "No one important",
    snatches the photo from the table and files it away.

-   2In early October 1988 Cameron invites Julia to join him for coffee
    before starting his shift at the Jakarta Post. Over coffee, Julia
    tells Cameron of her dream of securing a scholarship to pursue
    post-graduate studies in America. Cameron attempts, in turn, to tell
    of his dreams of becoming an international investigative journalist.
    But Julia stops him, saying, with a mischievous smile, that if she
    wants to know anything about him she will simply ask her father, who
    is a senior officer in military intelligence. Cameron puts down his
    coffee, looks around involuntarily, then tells Julia it is time for
    him to go.

-   2In early October 1988, Muharto takes Cameron to visit Pang
    Soeparto. Pang is effusive in praising Muharto for winning the court
    case for the quinine, and how Muharto kept up spirits during the
    weeks of penury trying to sell the quinine and return home.

-   2On 11 June 1947 Muharto awakes to discover that he and his crew are
    celebrities, with several newspapers giving front-page treatment to
    RI-002 and the "Javanese Crew".

-   2On 12 June 1947 Dutch representatives in Manila sue Muharto and
    Pang in civil court for possession of the quinine. Fortunately,
    Muharto's celebrity status also attracts the attention of Salipada
    Penatun, a sitting Senator as well as a practicing lawyer. His
    family has close cultural ties to Indonesia, and so offers his
    services pro bono.

-   2On 13 June 1947 Bob and Muharto are challenging the Dutch claim
    over the quinine cargo. Their lawyer, Salipada Penatun lays out the
    legal justification for ownership of the quinine, then lets Muharto
    give an impassioned plea, claiming that the money from selling the
    quinine will buy medicines and other essentials unavailable in the
    besieged capital. The Dutch counter by calling a plantation expert
    to testify that the Republic does not have the capability to process
    quinine, so the drug must have been produced in a Dutch-owed factory
    before the war. Muharto jumps to his feet, ready to protest this
    insult to his people's technological skill, but Penatun motions for
    him to sit down, then calmly tells the judge: "A foreigner is not
    qualified to discuss the internal matters of the sovereign Republic
    of Indonesia." The judge considers this with some sympathy, declines
    to allow the expert witness, and adjourns the session.

-   2On 29 July 1947, the judge rules in favor of the Republicans.

-   2On 29 July 1947, Bob invites Muharto, Pang, and Boedi to his
    apartment to celebrate that morning's verdict awarding the quinine
    to them. Bob's housemate has a military-grade short-wave radio,
    which Boedi immediately switches on and scans the military and
    civilian frequencies. The party mood vanishes when a news broadcast
    announces that an Indian blockade runner has been shot down on
    approach to Maguwo. All look toward Bob, and he nods in
    acknowledgement that RI-002 might be the last remaining hope to
    connect the Republic with the rest of the world.

-   2By mid August 1947, Muharto, Boedi and Pang are penniless as they
    wait for a buyer for the quinine Bob buys his "Javanese boys" a
    single meal each day at the cheapest eatery in Manila: The Madras
    Curry Restaurant. Muharto protests as Bob again picks up the bill
    for their bowls of curry. But Bob insists that as captain of RI-002
    he is responsible for their well-being until he returns them safely
    to Java.

-   2One day in August 1947, Muharto attempts to pay for their meals at
    Madras Curry, explaining that it is an honorarium for a talk to a
    group of the lady lawyers. To his surprise, Bob chastises him for
    "taking money for nothing".

-   2In mid August 1947, Salipada arranges for Muharto and Pang to meet
    Major Primitivo of the intelligence service. In the meeting,
    Primitivo says that his government, to show solidarity with the
    embattled Republic, wants to send a seasoned guerrilla fighter to
    train the youth militias, but only under conditions of absolute
    secrecy. Primitivo then summons and introduces Captain Ignacio
    Espina.

-   2At the mention of Espina, Muharto's face clouds, and tells Pang
    they must be going now. Cameron asks Muharto why they are in such a
    hurry, but he does not respond.

-   2In mid October 1988, Muharto takes Cameron to a long-overdue
    reunion with Boediardjo, the radio operator of RI-002. The two old
    comrades revel in recounting their experiences on RI-002, including
    the time Bob dove into a tropical storm to evade a Dutch patrol.

-   2As they approach Manila on 10 June 1947, Bob invites Muharto to sit
    in co-pilot seat and assist him with the flap controls Muharto is
    nervous, and pushes the flaps to full.

-   2At the airport on 10 June 1947, Bob is told to identify his
    co-pilot, a requirement for twin-engine aircraft on long-haul
    flights. Muharto gambles the Filipino officers cannot read
    Indonesia, and shows them his Air Force identification and falsely
    claims the rank of "Pilot".

-   2On 17 October 1947, Bob and Boedi fly ten paratroopers to be
    dropped near an insurgent stronghold in the forests of Kalimantan.
    None have jumped before, or even been in a aircraft, so tension is
    high. There is an uproar as the parachute of one trooper opens and
    dumps onto the cabin floor. The trooper swears it was an accident,
    but all others accuse him of cowardice. The troopers look at each
    other, wondering if any one will be next. Boedi enters the cabin.
    Though he is only an airman, the charismatic Boedi takes command of
    the situation, assuring the troopers that Bob has much wartime
    experience flying paratroopers and will drop them safely. He goes to
    the cockpit and talks with Bob for a moment. The Bob turns the
    aircraft over to his co pilot, leaves his seat and stands in the
    doorway, his body filling the frame. With Boedi translating, Bob
    assures the troops that he has done this many times during the war,
    and will drop them exactly on the requested target. Emboldened by
    Bobs air of quiet competence, each trooper moves forward and shakes
    Bobs hand. Bob returns to his seat, the dropmaster issues the
    command to jump, and the cabin empties, save for the dropmaster and
    a lone recruit wondering what fate is in store for him back at
    Maguwo. Boedi watches as the parachutes drift down and land are
    enveloped by the endless forest. Boedi asks Bob how many paradrops
    he made. Bob grins and answers: "None. I was a Navy pilot. All my
    missions were over water."

-   2On 20 October 1947 Bob flies two Indonesian aviators, Halim and
    Iswandi, to Bangkok where they will purchase a twin-prop airplane
    that will become RI-003. Dutch authorities pressure the Thai
    government to detain Freeberg as a blockade runner. The Thais
    briefly detain Freeberg in a comfortable hotel room, but the
    Indonesian crew must find their own accommodation. They can only
    afford rooms in a bar district. Boedi is delighted, but Halim and
    Iswandi are appalled. Both are engaged to be married, and worry that
    the families of their respective fiancées will learn that they have
    stayed in such a disreputable environment.

-   2On 10 October 1947 Bob flies three United Nations representatives
    to Sumatra, where they will assess popular support for the Republic.

-   2One evening in late October 1947, Bob invites Muharto to join him
    for dinner at the Hotel Merdeka. Bob is embarrassed when served the
    last can of corned beef left by the GOC delegates.

-   2After putting the paper to bed one evening in mid October, Syd
    invites Cameron to join him for a few drinks at his favorite bar,
    the Earthquake. He introduces Cameron to the owner, Sanyoto had been
    a drill sergeant in the Air Force, then worked as a fixer for
    foreign oil companies until he retired and opened the bar. Sanyoto
    maintains wide contacts in the highest levels of government and the
    military, so the Earthquake is popular with generals and cabinet
    ministers. Sanyoto tells Cameron that, as a friend of Syd, he is
    always welcome here, as long as he minds his manners and doesn't
    "needle" any of his regular guests.

-   2In mid October 1947 Cameron accompanies Muharto to a village on the
    upper slopes of the Merapi volcano to meet Muharto's spiritual
    advisor, Mbah Maridjan. The three hike the steep incline to a
    shrine; effortlessly in the case of the sexagenarian duo of Muharto
    and Maridjan; with some difficulty by their companion, some four
    decades their junior. Cameron watches respectfully as the two intone
    Islamic prayers, then lay Hindu-style floral offerings at the shrine
    to the gods of the mountain.

-   2On 10 October 1988 Muharto takes Cameron to the Air Force museum, a
    re-purposed hanger filled with decommissioned aircraft and other
    exhibits. Muharto points to a model of the Zogling training glider,
    and tells Cameron of training village boys who had never seen an
    airplane to become skilled pilots in mere weeks. Grinning, he tells
    of the time he fly one himself.

-   2 In September 1946, Muharto pulls rank and commandeers the Zogling
    training glider pulled by a Harley Davidson engine. When he lands,
    Suryadarma is waiting, and angrily orders him back to his desk.

-   2On 10 October 1988 in the museum, Muharto seeks out the curator,
    who invites them into his office. Muharto asks the curator to
    retrieve scraps from the RI-002 wreckage stored at the museum. One
    of the items is the dynamo with the bullet inexplicably lodged in
    the windings. Muharto picks it up, and from his point of view, the
    room around him fades into mist.

Muharto is astounded to realize he is somehow in the radio nook of
RI-002 on the day of the crash. The airplane shutters as the engines
scream in protest. Muharto sees two shadowy figures in the pilot seats,
and a forested mountainside fills the window.

The museum office comes back into focus, and Muharto sees the concerned
faces of Cameron and the curator. Muharto places the dynamo back into
the storage box and says, in a wavering voice, that they will miss their
train back to Jakarta if they don't hurry.

-   2Julia is intrigued about Emeria, so in mid October 1988 she
    researches in Dutch-language art publications. Julia learns that
    Emeria, who was in her late 20s during the struggle period, was the
    first female Indonesian painter of modern art. She was from an
    aristocratic family and extremely well-connected, with contacts at
    the highest levels in both Dutch and Indonesian society.

-   2Julia returns to IPPHOS in late October 1988 and presses Victor to
    tell her more about Emeria. Victor first refuses, but Julia turns on
    the charm.

-   2On 10 November 1946, Victor marches off troop ship with other
    recruits. Among his possessions is a Malay-Dutch phrasebook and a
    sketchpad. Victor had been told that he and his fellow recruits were
    being sent to protect the Javanese subjects of the Dutch queen from
    a gang of criminals and collaborators, so he had studied Malay on
    the voyage to be about to communicate with the people under his
    protection. During the voyage Victor had made extensive sketches of
    the landscape at ports of call and along coastlines. This had
    attracted the attention of an officer, who praised the rendering of
    detail.

-   2Arriving at work one day in September 1947, Victor sees a sealed
    envelope on his desk that he knows to be reassignment orders. He
    opens the envelope with dread, certain that he is being sent to a
    combat unit. But the orders are for Victor to report to KNIL
    headquarters, where he will work as an assistant photographic
    technician and analyst with Spoor's intelligence unit.

-   2In October 1947, Victor singles out Emeria as the highlight of the
    exhibition in one of his reviews. A few days later, Emeria contacts
    Victor Jan Boon to invite Victor to her studio.

-   2In early November 1988 Muharto takes Cameron to meet his friend
    Alex Kawilarang, Also present is a Paul Verspoor, who is a retired
    Dutch airforce officer vacationing in Indonesia. Verspoor, who had
    been a KNIL squadron leader, tells Cameron about his "very boring
    mission" waiting to intercept RI-002 near Bukittinggi on 1
    October 1948. Afterward, as he escorts Muharto and Cameron to the
    door, Alex winks at Cameron and tells him to keep looking, as his
    old friend Paul knows more than he lets on.

-   2On the evening of 10 October 1988, Cameron is having a drink at the
    Earthquake Bar, chatting with Sanyoto, when Colonel Eddy, out of
    uniform, takes the empty seat beside him. Sanyoto introduces "Pak
    Eddy" to Cameron and leaves them to chat. Eddy is affable, and asks
    Cameron general questions about how he likes Indonesia and other
    pleasantries. Then the conversation shifts to pointed inquiries
    about Cameron's education and life goals. After Eddy leaves, Cameron
    remarks to Sanyoto that he feels like he has just been interrogated.

-   2On the morning of 12 October 1988, Eddy has a heart-to-heart talk
    with Julia, letting her know that he opposes Julia marrying a
    foreigner. Eddy has checked into Cameron's background, and found he
    is penniless and with a spotty academic record, though he excelled
    in journalism and seems to be a good writer. Julia retorts that her
    relationship with Cameron is purely professional. If the story they
    are researching results in a book, her expert facilitation will look
    good on a future application for graduate school.

-   2On the evening of 11 November 1988, Julia is sitting in a
    restaurant with Eric, a young Indonesian man of good family. Eric
    mentions his surprise Julia's mother phoned his mother to suggest he
    take her to dinner. Eric dominates the conversation, insisting, with
    the authoritative confidence typical of the offspring of new wealth,
    how he is an essential component in the business deal that their
    respective fathers are cooking up. Julia wants more details about
    this "business deal", but decides it would be better to remain
    silent.

-   2One evening in late October 1988 at the Earthquake, the music is
    supplied by a band playing keroncong, a guitar-driven genre that
    features sentimental Dutch-language lyrics. Regarded as "music for
    old folks" the audience of senior and retired military officers laps
    it up. Afterward, Sanyoto introduces Syd and Cameron to Samuel
    Quiko, the band leader. Sanyoto mentions that Samuel had been active
    in the revolution, and might have interesting stories to tell.\

-   2When researching with Julia at the library in late October 1988,
    Cameron mentions his meeting with Samuel Quiko. Julia recognizes the
    name, and disappears into the stacks, reappearing with an armful of
    magazines containing articles about keroncong. Julia sees that in
    several of the photos Samuel is with Emeria. Julia suggests that
    they interview Samuel Quiko. Cameron demurs, saying that a guy who
    plays "music for seniors" would be of little value in investigating
    the fate of RI-002.

-   2In mid October 1988, Julia goes alone to Kampung Tugu, a village on
    the outskirts of Jakarta that is the home of keroncong, to interview
    Samuel Quiko.

-   2Samuel suggests that if Julia wants to know more about Emeria, she
    should talk to Regina, Emiria's assistant who is now an artist in
    her own right.

-   2In mid November 1988, Muharto and Cameron visit the widow and son
    of Santoso. The son, Hadi, admits that the night before the ceremony
    he talked a guard into letting him view his father's remains, and
    took a necklace belonging to his father when the guard's back with
    turned. He gave the neckace his mother, who was holding it at the
    ceremony the following morning when she feel into trance and had a
    horrifying vision of being in the cockpit as it crashed. Muharto
    asks to hold the necklace. He intones prayers and matras and falls
    into a trance. He opens his eyes to find he is in the RI-002
    cockpit, this time sitting in the co-pilot seat, where he had spent
    hundreds of hours. He turns to the left, expecting to see Bob, but
    instead sees Bambang flying the Dakota.

-   2In December 1946 Bob partners with Singapore-based businessman Hugh
    Savage to start Southeastern Airlines.

-   2In March 1947, Bob Freeberg joins with Bob Walters to purchase a
    war-surplus Dakota.

-   2On 1 April 1947 Bob returns to Manila to find the jointly owned
    Dakota is missing. Suspecting an April Fools joke, Bob plays along,
    but becomes concerned when the aircraft does not reappear. Bob does
    not confront Walters, Instead, he discovers the location, and moves
    it himself to another strip on the outskirts of Manila.

-   2In mid August 1947, as Boedi is having a few beers at the AB Bar,
    Bob Walters sits down and launches into a tirade about his business
    dealings with Bob Freeberg.

-   2In late October 1988, while Cameron drinks alone in the Earthquake,
    Sanyoto introduces him to George Rueneker, a retired Air Force
    officer who owns an aviation-services company. George is of mixed
    European-Indonesian heritage and, like many of his fellow "Indos"
    decided to support the Indonesian struggle for freedom.

-   2In early October 1947 Muharto moves Ining into a house on Jalan
    Jetis on the slopes of Mount Merapi, adjacent to the forested areas
    where Ining will train students to become guerrilla fighters. They
    toast the occasion with whiskey brought from Manila.

-   2In late October 1947, Muharto sees that Ining is isolated living
    among the youth militia in the forest. He asks George to keep Ining
    company in his absence. George witnesses Ining berate the young
    recruits and sees the displeasure on their faces. Whenever he
    visits, Ining asks George to bring whiskey the next time.

-   2On 30 November 1947, the evening that RI-002 will fly the
    Indonesian diplomats to Manila, Ining writes a letter Major
    Primitivo asking to be relieved of his assignment and returned home.
    He rushes to Maguwo, but is seconds too late to give it to Muharto
    to take to Manila. George, on duty as flight controller, is on the
    tarmac. He sees that Ining is upset, so he asks Muharto's brother,
    Mas Ded, to take Ining back to Jalan Jetis and stay with him until
    his calms down.

-   2On 27 December 1947, RI-003 crashes on a beach in Malaya.

-   2During a routine radio contact with Jogja on 17 December 1947,
    Boedi is told that Ining and Mas Ded were found dead of gunshot
    wounds at Ining's house.

-   2On 18 December 1947, Muharto reports Ining's death to Primitivo.
    Muharto is astounded when the major accuses Muharto and his brother
    of being clandestine communists, and detains Muharto for a day for
    interrogation.

-   2On 29 December 1947, RI-002 departs for Pekanbaru carrying 14
    Republican officials and a coffin containing Ining's remains. Bad
    weather over Pekanbaru forces RI-002 to divert to Singapore. Dutch
    representatives on the island pressure the British into grounding
    the Dakota because of "airworthiness" issues.

-   2On 15 January 1948, British officials open Ining's coffin,
    searching for contraband. Finding none, and with RI-002 brought up
    to minimal airworthiness standards, they granted Bob permission to
    depart, to the great annoyance of the Dutch.

-   2In mid January 1948, Spoor reads an article in a Manila newspaper
    speculating that Ining's death resulted from an arms deal gone
    disastrously wrong. He decides to make stopping the blockade runners
    a priority.

-   2Victor Meets Robert Koke at Spoors office

-   2In mid February 1948 Muharto and Boedi shop for clothes for their
    fellow officers.

-   2Bob purchases tailor-made suits.

-   2In February 1948, Bob sends part of his share from the quinine sale
    to a automobile dealership in Parsons to purchase an Oldsmobile for
    his parents.

-   2In February 1948, Salipada Penatun offers to have Bob Walters
    deported. On the advice of Tom Lee, Bob declines the offer.

-   2In March 1948, Spoor decides to consider Freeberg a major drug
    smuggler, and orders his fighters to use deadly force if they
    encounter RI-002.

-   2While visiting IPPHOS in late October 1988, Victor tells Cameron of
    Robert Koke, who his Indonesian friends identified as a CIA
    operative. Cameron becomes convinced that the newly formed CIA
    supported Walter Foote and Spoor in their first attempt to foment a
    military coup against the colonial government.

-   2In early November 1988 Cameron and Julia have dinner with Muharto
    and Ani. Afterward, Cameron and Muharto fall deep into discussion
    about the revelations of their investigations. By this point, both
    Ani and Julia think they are plummeting down a conspiracy rabbit
    hole, but keep their views to themselves.

-   2In early April 1948 Ani's father questions Muharto's "demotion"
    from Lt Col. to Captain and why he is flying around with this
    foreigner.

-   2In mid May 1948 Ani and Muharto formalize their engagement. The
    occasion is spoiled when Muharto tells Ani that he wants to decline
    promotion to stay , but Ani talks him out of it.

-   2In mid April 1947Ani serves rice to refugees. She has no idea what
    to do in kitchen, never having been in one before.

-   2in mid May 1948 Ani berates Muharto for wanting to turn down the
    promotion to Major and continue flying with Freeberg.

-   2In March 1948, Muhammad Hatta invites John Coast to to begin
    regular services to Jogja. Coast and investors in Bangkok form
    Pacific Overseas Air Charter, or POAS, and hire American Dave Fowler
    as head pilot.

-   2In March 1948, Suryadarma orders Bob to transport Republican opium
    to Bukittinggi. Bob knows that if he is intercepted, the Dutch could
    jail him for decades as a drug smuggler. Nevertheless, he accepts
    the commission without complaint.

-   2One day in April 1948, Bob is annoyed when Bambang shows up late
    for opium run, forcing him to cancel the mission.

-   2In April 1948, Hugh Savage tells Bob that he is concerned that the
    Bob Walter's fiasco has warned off potential customers and investors
    of SE Airways.

-   2In mid October 1988, Julia reads a review in the Bali Post of a
    book written by Louise Koke about her and her husband Robert running
    a hotel in Bali in the 1930s. Julia finds *Our Hotel in Bali* in a
    newly opened bookstore selling English-language books. The portrait
    of Robert Koke that emerged from the book seemed totally at odds
    with the perception of a CIA officer seeking to destabilize a
    regime. Julia tracks down a Balinese employee mentioned in the book
    who went on to become a hotel professional. He confirms the respect
    the Kokes held for the Balinese and Indonesians in general, and
    supplies the name of an acquaintance who encountered Koke in
    post-war Batavia.

-   2In mid November 1988, Julia informs Cameron about Robert Koke.
    Cameron dismisses her, saying that CIA agents are masters at
    dissemination. Julia is annoyed and offended, but remains silent.
    Instead, she sends a letter to Koke through the book's publisher,
    asking for more info about his time in Batavia.\

-   2At a party in Manila in mid April 1948, Muharto is appalled when
    one of Bob's housemates boasts of shooting down own squad leader. He
    decides to not tell Bob of his plan to smuggle gems into Manila to
    be traded for sidearms. He arranges for Filipino commandos to enter
    RI-002 and retrieve the gems from a concealed niche. The following
    morning, Bob notices that the cockpit had been disturbed, and
    confronts Muharto.

-   2In mid March 1948 Muharto and Bambang argue over who gets to sit in
    the right-hand seat of RI-002.

-   2In mid April 1948 Bambang cannot conceal his envy of Moeljono when
    his fellow aviator flies the twin-engine RI-005 Avro-anson from
    Bukittinggi to Jogjakarta.

-   2In early May 1948 With the reassignment of Muharto to headquarters,
    Bambang gets his coveted permanent spot in the right-hand seat of
    RI-002.

-   2One morning in May 1948, the landing gear collapses just as RI-002
    is preparing to take off from the strip at Bukittinggi. Bob checks
    the wing for damage, and decides that the new crack in not serious.
    Later that morning he takes off. Dave Fowler looks on, shaking his
    head.

-   2On the Soekarno Tour in mid June 1948 Bambang ingratiates himself
    with Soekarno in the hope of being selected to fly RI-001. Boedi
    finds his efforts, and Soekarno's condescending replies, amusing.

-   2During the Soekarno tour In mid June 1948, Bob refuses Soekarno's
    order to land on unsafe airfield. Soekarno is annoyed, but then
    commends Bob for standing up to him.

-   2In late June 1948 during a speech on an airstrip, Soekarno points
    to Bob in the cockpit, proclaiming: "This is Bob Freeberg, a brave,
    good man and a friend of all Indonesians"

-   2On 1 July 1948 Suryadarma orders Bob to Sumatra on another mission.
    Bob refuses, and infuriates Suryadarma by returning to Manila that
    day.

-   2In mid December 1988, Cameron arranges to meet Alex and Paul at the
    Earthquake the night before Paul will return to the Netherlands.
    After several drinks, and with Alex urging him on, Paul reveals that
    Westerling had contacted him in early 1949 to ask if his squadron
    would support a coup against the colonial government. Verspoor knew
    that many of his squadron would support Westerling, and so gave a
    vague, noncommittal answer. Verspoor realizes his indiscretion, and
    begs Cameron to not repeat this information, as most of his former
    comrades are still alive.

-   2Cameron invites Julia to a party in Kemang in late November 1988.
    Julia is quietly incensed when she overhears a group of Dutch men
    joking about the laziness and incompetence of their Indonesian
    staff. She hides her displeasure, but when another expat attempts to
    offer her money to leave the party with him, she erupts in fury.

-   2On 27 December 1948 Ani gives Westerling a tongue lashing to divert
    attention while Muharto swallows his air force identification.

-   2In early December 1988 Julia tracks down Emiria teaching art to
    children in a village on the outskirts of Jogja. Emeria reveals that
    she after independence she traveled to the Netherlands on a
    "colonial guilt" scholarship, married a Dutch academic, and returned
    to Indonesia after his death a few years previously. Emeria regrets
    using Victor, but says that in war you have to choose sides.

-   2In mid June 1948 Cobley flies communists to Madiun

-   2On 10 September 1948 Spoor orders a night patrol not to engage a
    blockade running POAS flight because he is informed that American
    and other civilians are passengers.

-   2On 15 August 1948 Bob returns to Jogja with both pilot and aircraft
    in good shape.

-   2In September 1948 Suryadarma takes away Fowler's fuel allowance.
    Fowler resolves the issue by going over Suryadarma's head and
    complaining directly to Muhammad Hatta, who had signed the charter
    agreement with POAS.

-   2In late September 1948 Boedi brings Freeberg and Muharto together
    over whiskey to reconcile differences.

-   2On 10 September 1948, while flying a group of international
    journalists to Jogja under cover of darkness, Fowler believes he
    spots fighter planes tailing him. His radio operator hears traffic
    on Dutch military frequencies. When when Fowler looks again, the
    fighters are gone.

-   2In September 1948 Suryadarma takes away Bob's fuel allowance for
    undisclosed reasons.

-   2Over whiskey with Fowler, Muharto, and Boedi at Hotel Merdeka in
    late September 1948, Bob complains about Suryadarma and some of his
    staff, saying they want this or that but never follow through. He
    says that many Indonesians (present company excepted) would cut off
    their nose to spite their face.

-   2On 28 September 1948 RI-002 drops leaflets over Madiun. Santoso is
    valuable in pointing out neighborhoods where residents may be
    receptive to message from government to stay loyal to the Republic.

-   2During the propaganda leaflet run over Madiun on 27 September 1948,
    Bambang watches Bob demonstrate how to guide RI-002 through
    low-level maneuvers to evade enemy fighters.

-   2On 29 September 1948 Hugh Savage tells Bob that Southeast Airlines
    has failed, their one aircraft has been repossessed, and he has lost
    his investment.

-   2On 25 September Tom Lee accompanies the last RI-002 flight to Jogja
    to "study veterans claims". Tom and Bob apply for a license to shoot
    a documentary film.

-   2On 29 September 1948 Suryadarma orders Fowler to transport a
    quarter ton of gold to Bukittinggi. Fowler refuses the commission as
    being too risky. Suryadarma has no choice but the turn to Bob
    Freeberg.

-   2On 30 September 1948 Suryadarma reluctantly assigns Bob the mission
    to transport gold to Bukittinggi.

-   2Leaving the Earthquake on evening in early December 1988, Cameron
    is waylaid by Pemuda Pancasila thugs outside of the Earthquake.
    Sanyoto appears, and whacks the leader on the nose with his cane.

-   2In early December 1988 Sanyoto arranges meeting with Yapto, the
    head of the Pemuda Pancasila. Yapto is affable, and expresses a
    sincere apologize for the unpleasantness with his boys, which must
    have been a case of mistaken identity. Yapto gives Cameron a signed
    business card to show to any PP members who might threaten him in
    the future.

-   2In mid December 1988, Julia finds a photo in a misfiled volume of
    of BN. The image shows a Dakota with "002" painted on the nose
    guarded by a KNIL soldier. Victor had seen photographs of
    Karangendah when a KNIL photo analyst, and suggests the photo was
    taken there.

-   2In December 1988 Anwar arranges for Cameron to sneak into
    Karangendah with his nephew, who is smuggling out tank diesel engine
    parts which are military grade and reliable. Good for smuggling
    boats.

-   2In December 1988 Anwar reveals that KNIL officers had paid him to
    smuggle a substantial quantity of gold to Singapore. Anwar also
    introduces Cameron to several men who had been employed at
    Karangendah in menial civilian jobs. They attest that they had seen
    the crew in captivity. However, no one remembers seeing Freeberg.
    Anwar Congo reveals that gold was used to purchase guns smuggled
    from Malaya, which then taken overland to Lampung by Sumatra preman.

-   2On 5 October 1948 Bambang decides to fly RI-002 back to Jogja, but
    crashes on Mount Punggur.

-   2Bambang takes control and flies back to Branti. When they reach the
    mountain range on the border with Republican controlled Lampung, the
    escorting fighters attack. Bambang dives into valleys, recreating
    what Bob did the previous week.

-   2Eddy tells Julia she should start applying to graduate study
    programs abroad. Eddy explains he is retiring, but has arranged to
    keep his security clearance, so he can access field intelligence He
    is doing security assessments for foreign companies by stripping out
    classified data and putting the rest in context. Approved all the
    way to the top. Julia refuses, accusing her father of corruption.

-   2

-   2
