[Slugline]{date="7 June 1947" location="Cilotok"}Bob Freeberg lands his
unmarked Dakota cargo plane on a remote beach in southwest Java, the
huge aircraft shuddering to a stop a few meters from a cliff at one end.
Villagers appear, marveling at this colossus from the sky. They are
friendly and offer Bob and his two Filipino crew members food and a
place to sleep. But the following morning, Indonesian soldiers appear.
One points to the lack of registration on the Dakotas tail and shouts
"*Mata-Mata*!", "Spy!" They point their rifles directly at Bob. He
replies with the only words they might understand, a name: "Captain
Petit Muharto"

[Slugline]{date="25 September 1988" location="Muharto Residence"}Cameron
Bishop, an American journalism student interning at the Jakarta Post,
calls on retired Air Force Major Petit Muharto to interview him about
his experiences flying blockade runs with Bob Freeberg in his
war-surplus Dakota registered to the new Republic of Indonesia as
RI-002. Muharto begins with the surprising message he received at his
desk at Maguwo air base in Jogjakarta.

[Slugline]{date="8 June 1947" location="Maguwo"}Muharto receives a
message flown by airborne military courier from Pang Soeparto, an army
lieutenant stationed in Tasikmalaya. The message contains the news that
a foreign pilot had landed an unmarked cargo aircraft on a nearby beach
and, astoundingly, had asked for Muharto by name. Muharto takes this
information to his commander, Suryadarma, who agrees that the matter is
worth investigation.

[Slugline]{wrap_scene="interview" date="25 September 1988"
location="Muharto Residence"}Muharto tells Cameron that he flew to
Tasikmalaya on a Nikosoren, was one of a score barely servicable planes
the Japanese had left behind. The air force mechanics kept these
aircraft flying through skill and guesswork, but Muharto was aware that
any flight could end in disaster. To keep his mind from this
eventuality, Muharto thought about the American pilots he had met during
the blockade runs he had organized from Singapore to Jogjakarta. He
decided that only Bob Freeberg possessed the skill and nerve to land at
night on a remote beach. Bob had been the pilot of the third blockade
run. Though these had been standard charter flights -- they even had a
flight attendant, a lovely Filipina named Miss Brown -- the third flight
would test the skills of any aviator.

[Slugline]{date="31 March 1947" location="CALI Dakota"}Muharto leads a
blockade run with Bob Freeberg, then a contract pilot for a Manila-based
charter airline, as captain. Amid poor visibility over Java, Bob
demonstrates his piloting skill by diving through a break in the clouds,
leveling off under the cloud cover a few hundred meters above the
ground. Muharto spots a railway line, and tells Bob that it leads along
the valley to terminate in Jogja. Bob follows the line, barely visible
through the rain, and jokingly asks Muharto if there are any tunnels
between here the Jogja. The look on Muharto's face suggests that he is
not entirely sure.

[Slugline]{location="Muharto Residence" date="25 September 1988"
wrap_scene="interview"}Muharto tells Cameron that at Tasikmalaya, Pang
Suparto confirmed that it was indeed Bob Freeberg stuck on the beach.
They loaded two barrels of aviation fuel into a jeep and drove to the
coast.

[Slugline]{location="Cilotok" date="8 June 1947"}Muharto and Pang marvel
that Freeberg had been able to land on this short stretch of beach,
bookended by high bluffs. Muharto recognizes Freeberg and they greet as
friends. Fearing that a patrolling Dutch fighter could appear at any
time, Muharto, in a stirring speech, implores the assembled villagers to
tear apart their houses to fashion an improvised runway from the bamboo
mats used as walls. They do so, and with Muharto and Pang on board, the
Dakota takes off and flies to Maguwo.

[Slugline]{location="Maguwo" date="8 June 1947"}Suryadarma commissions
Bob to fly a cargo of high-value quinine to Manila and return with
essential medicines and spare parts. Muharto expresses concern about the
reception that might await unmarked aircraft carrying high-value goods
into Manila. He suggests that they paint a fictitious registration
number onto the tail. After some debate, Muharto, Bob, and Suryadarma
agree on "RI-002", reserving "RI-001" for a future presidential
aircraft.

[Slugline]{date="25 September 1988" location="Muharto Residence"
wrap_scene="interview"}Muharto explains that they landed in Manila
without incident. However, the Dutch diplomats there claimed the quinine
cargo as Dutch property, and took them to court.

[Slugline]{location="Manila courtroom" date="20 June 1947"}Bob and
Muharto are challenging the Dutch claim over the quinine cargo. Their
lawyer, Salipada Penatun, who is also a sitting senator with extensive
high-level contacts, lays out the legal justification for ownership of
the quinine, then lets Muharto give an impassioned plea, claiming that
the money from selling the quinine will buy medicines and other
essentials unavailable in the besieged capital. The Dutch counter by
calling a plantation expert to testify that the Republic does not have
the capability to process quinine, so the drug must have been produced
in a Dutch-owed factory before the war. Muharto jumps to his feet, ready
to protest this insult to his people's technological skill, but Penatun
motions for him to sit down, then calmly tells the judge: "A foreigner
is not qualified to discuss the internal matters of the sovereign
Republic of Indonesia." The judge considers this with some sympathy,
declines to allow the expert witness, and adjourns the session.

[Slugline]{location="Presidential Palace" date="1 October 1947"}During a
tour of the palace with Muharto Bob is astounded to be ushered into the
office of President Soekarno. As was his custom in private conversation,
Soekarno treats Bob as an equal and puts him at ease, imploring the
American to do what he can to help the Indonesian struggle for freedom.

[Slugline]{location="Hotel Merdeka" date="15 November 1947"}Bob and
Muharto have dinner. Muharto is served rice and tempe. Bob, to his great
embarrassment, is given slices of freshly friend corned beef.

[Slugline]{date="30 November 1947" location="Maguwo"}Bob's greatest
service to the Republic was flying top officials and technocrats to a
United Nation's conference in the Philippines, where they successfully
made the case for Indonesian independence. These educated men treat Bob
with the same great respect as do the common people of Jogja.

[Slugline]{date="25 September 1988" location="Muharto Residence"}Muharto
tells Cameron that he, Boedi and Pang were penniless as they waited for
the verdict to be handed down. He found them simple accommodation in a
boarding house, and bought them a single meal each day at the cheapest
eatery in Manila: The Madras Curry Restaurant.

[Slugline]{location="Muharto Residence" date="25 September 1988"}Muharto
tells Cameron that he flew with RI-002 until May 1948, when he was
promoted to major and posted to headquarters. Muharto saw little of Bob
after that, but was looking for forward to having Bob as guest of honor
at this wedding in October.

[Slugline]{date="30 September 1948" location="Maguwo"}Muharto sees Bob
off on the runway. Bob tells Muharto that he will be in Singapore and
Manila for a couple of weeks, but promises to return to Jogja with his
own fiancee in time to attend Muharto's wedding.

[Slugline]{location="Muharto Residence" date="25 September 1988"}Muharto
tells Cameron that on the afternoon of 1 October he heard reports that
RI-002 had not arrived at Bukittinggi. In the following days, the Dutch
denied any knowledge of the disappearance, and the Republic was unable
to mount more than a cursory search. Muharto shows Cameron a clipping
dated 1983 about ratten gatherers finding wreckage on a remote mountain
in South Sumatra. Muharto said that he used his AURI credentials to
research the archives for the investigation report. He found, to his
astonishment, that the wreckage had actually been discovered in April
1977.

[Slugline]{date="25 April 1977" location="Mount Punggur"}Two wiry men
dressed in shabby clothes lead a squad of airmen and their officer, Lt.
Sulaiman, through a forested hillside to the wreckage of RI-002. The
airmen set up camp and search the area. They find fragments of a wing
with the faded letters: RI-00, other airplane parts, including a dynamo
with a bullet wedged between the windings and armature. There are a few
fragments of human remains, which the soldiers reverently dig from the
earth and carefully wrap in cloth. They also find two empty wooden
crates labeled: "Gold", but a thorough search of the area does not find
any trace of the treasure itself.

[Slugline]{date="20 July 1977" location="Tanjung Karang"}Five coffins
draped in Indonesian flags lay on a platform in an otherwise empty
hanger. A sixth coffin, larger than the rest and without a flag, rests
on a separate platform. A flatbed truck pulls into the hanger and a
squad of airmen, in silence, pick up each of the flag-draped coffins and
place them on the truck. But they leave the sixth coffin where it lies
as the truck pulls away.

[Slugline]{location="Muharto Residence" date="25 September 1988"}Muharto
tells Cameron that the sixth coffin, presumably containing Bobs remains,
could not be buried with the others because he was a foreigner.
Muharto's expression as he finishes his reminiscences convinces Cameron
that he regarded Freeberg as a close friend, and is seeking closure
about his mysterious disappearance. As Cameron rises to leave, Muharto
wonders that if he had turned down promotion and had been with Bob on
the final flight, maybe it would not have ended in tragedy.

[Slugline]{date="26 September 1988" location="Jakarta Post"}Cameron
writes up the interview, and gives it to managing editor Sabam Siagian,
who had given him the assignment. Sabam glances at the copy, grunts,
then passes the pages to Syd Jardine, the senior copy editor. Syd reads
it carefully, then remarks that Freeberg comes off as a "super-pilot"
and not believable. He suggests Cameron find other accounts of Bob by
researching in the reference section of the newly opened National
Library.

[Slugline]{date="27 September 1988" location="National Library"}Cameron
uses his Jakarta Post credentials to enter the reference section. Julia
Suryakusuma, the only staffer speaking fluent English, is assigned to
fetch the material he needs from the stacks. Julia returns with an
armload of books, and Cameron begins reading. Skimming through the
supplementary background material Julia selected, Cameron's attention is
drawn to a passage in a book by British diplomat John Coast about
meeting Bob in Bukittinggi.

[Slugline]{location="Bukittinggi" date="May 1948"}John Coast and Dave
Fowler watch as the starboard landing gear on RI-002 slowly collapses
from hydraulic system failure. Bob emerges from the cockpit and admits
that the craft is suffering from the wear-and-tear of past months,
especially repeated landings on rough jungle airstrips. But he is
waiting for the Indonesians to pay him the huge debt they owe so he can
do the much-needed repairs. Coast tells Bob that he is welcome to fly
for his company, POAS, if RI-002 becomes too dangerous. Bob thanks him,
but insists that he will find a way to fix his beloved Dakota.

[Slugline]{date="28 September 1988" location="National Library"}After
hours of research, Cameron asks Julia where he can get a cup of coffee.
Julia invites him to join her at the library canteen. Julia tells
Cameron of her dream of securing a scholarship to pursue post-graduate
studies in America. Cameron attempts, in turn, to tell of his dreams of
becoming an international investigative journalist. But Julia stops him,
saying, with a mischievious smile, that if she wants to know anything
about him she will simply ask her father, who is a senior officer in
military intelligence.

[Slugline]{location="Jakarta Post" date="3 October 1988"}Muharto visits
to personally thank Sabam and Cameron for the article, and to tell them
that he has been bombarded with calls from old friends asking about what
happened to the gold. Syd Jardine says that since unloading a quarter
ton of gold would require considerable resources, discovering who might
have had the motivation and ability to transport and sell the gold could
solve the mystery of RI-002. Muharto agrees, and Cameron eagerly offers
to help. Sabam gives his grudging assent, but reminds Cameron that the
Jakarta Post cannot be involved, and he must to any research on his own
time.

[Slugline]{location="Boediardjo Residence" date="5 October 1988"}Muharto
takes Cameron to a long-overdue reunion with Boediardjo, the radio
operator of RI-002. The two old comrades revel in recounting their
experiences on RI-002, including the time Bob dove into a tropical storm
to evade a Dutch patrol.

[Slugline]{date="7 October 1947" location="RI-002"}To avoid a Dutch
patrol in the vicinity, Bob steers RI-002 into a violent tropical storm.
Boedi grins when he sees Muharto's terrified face as the Dakota is
violently buffeted, with sickening plunges in altitude. Bob tells
Muharto to not worry; when a Navy test pilot he would fly through
typhoons.

[Slugline]{location="RI-002" date="17 October 1947"}Bob drops
paratroopers into the Kalimantan forest. This is the first time in an
aircraft for all, so Bob gives an inspiring pep talk to the terrified
troopers, translated by Boedi.

[Slugline]{date="20 October 1947" location="Bangkok"}RI-002 is detained
by the request of Dutch officials in Bangkok

[Slugline]{location="National Library" date="2 October 1988"}Cameron
returns to the library to enlist Julia's assistance in investigating the
mystery by researching library archives. Julia is eager to help, and
disappears into the stacks, emerging with bound volumes of
Dutch-language newspapers. She reads aloud, in English, news articles
printed in the days after the disappearance.

[Slugline]{date="5 October 1948" location="KNIL"}A reporter from the
Bataviaasch Nieuwsblad newspaper accosts General Spoor in the hallway
and badgers him for information of the fate of RI-002. Spoor claims
ignorance, and grows visibly annoyed when the reporter press him,
breaking off the interview and slamming the door to his office.

[Slugline]{date="3 October 1988" location="National Library"}Julia tells
Cameron that, by the tone of the language, the reporter was convinced
that Spoor was hiding something. She says they might get more
information from Victor de Jong, a Dutch-born, naturalized Indonesian
photographer who consults for the museum. Victor had been a Dutch
conscript assigned to KNIL headquarters as a photographic assistant
analyst.

[Slugline]{date="11 October 1988" location="IPPHOS"}Julia and Cameron
enter the IPPHOS office, located on the ground floor of a building in
the old sectin of Jakarta and one inspection away from being condemned.
An ancient air conditioner wheezes over a window, barely reducing the
heat and humidity. Victor, a slight, elderly man of sallow complexion,
is the only person in the office and openly delighted at receiving
company. Julia introduces Cameron and explains the purpose of their
visit. The negatives and prints are held in tattered folders placed on
shelves seemingly at random, but Victor strides confidently to a shelf,
pulls out a folder from the middle of a pile, and brings it back to the
desk. He leafs through the folder and pulls out a strip of negatives
showing a large American standing in front of an airplane. It is Bob
Freeberg and RI-002. Victor repeats the process and shows Cameron images
of Spoor in his office.

[Slugline]{location="KNIL" date="20 October 1947"}Victor overhears Spoor
raging that the Thai authorities had released Freeberg.

[Slugline]{date="11 October 1988" location="IPPHOS"}Julia notices a
photograph of a striking young woman standing in front of a painting.
The caption reads "Emeria Soenassa in her studio 1948". Julia asks
Victor who she is. Victor replies "No one important", snatches the photo
from the table and files it away.

[Slugline]{location="IPPHOS" date="6 October 1988"}Cameron and Julia
realize that they are both headed to the Hotel Hilton -- he to the bar,
her to the coffee shop -- to meet friends. Cameron offers her a lift on
his Harley. Julia's friends see Cameron drop her off, an assume he is
wealthy. Her friends, like Julia the daughters of high military
officers, discuss their plans to attend presigious universities in major
world capitals, paid for by their fathers' corrupt earnings from side
businesses. They joke that since Julia's father, Colonel Eddy, works in
the intelligence service, a "dry" posting, hooking up with Cameron is
her best chance to study abroad.

[Slugline]{date="15 October 1988" location="Mount Merapi"}Cameron
accompanies Muharto to a village on the upper slopes of the Merapi
volcano to meet Muharto's spiritual advisor, Mbah Maridjan. The three
hike the steep incline to a shrine; effortlessly in the case of the
sexagenarian duo of Muharto and Maridjan, but with some difficulty by
their companion, some four decades their junior. Cameron watches
respectfully as the two intone Islamic prayers, then lay Hindu-style
floral offerings at the shrine to the gods of the mountain.

[Slugline]{date="15 October 1988" location="Maguwo"}Muharto takes
Cameron to the Air Force museum, a re-purposed hanger filled with
decommissioned aircraft and other exhibits. Muharto points to a model of
the Zogling training glider, and tells Cameron of training village boys
who had never seen an airplane to become skilled pilots in mere weeks.
Grinning, he tells of the time he fly one himself.

[Slugline]{date="15 October 1946" location="Maguwo"}Muharto pulls rank
and commandeers the Zogling training glider pulled by a Harley Davidson
engine. When he lands, Suryadarma is waiting, and angrily orders him
back to his desk.

[Slugline]{location="Maguwo" date="15 October 1988"}Muharto seeks out
the curator, who invites them into his office. Muharto asks the curator
to retrieve scraps from the RI-002 wreckage stored at the museum. One of
the items is the dynamo with the bullet inexplicably lodged in the
windings. Muharto picks it up, and from his point of view, the room
around him fades into mist.

[Slugline]{location="RI-002" date="1 October 1948"}Muharto is astounded
to realize he is somehow in the radio nook of RI-002. The airplane
shutters as the engines scream in protest. Muharto sees two shadowy
figures in the pilot seats, and a forested mountainside fills the
window.

[Slugline]{location="Maguwo" date="15 October 1988"}The museum office
comes back into focus, and Muharto sees the concerned faces of Cameron
and the curator. Muharto places the dynamo back into the storage box and
says, in a wavering voice, that they will miss their train back to
Jakarta if they don't hurry.

[Slugline]{date="15 October 1988" location="National Library"}Julia is
intrigued about Emeria, so she does some research in Dutch-language art
publications. Learns she was the first Indonesian painter of modern art
and a socialite with contacts at the highest levels in both Dutch and
Indonesian society.

[Slugline]{date="16 October 1988" location="IPPHOS"}Julia presses Victor
to tell her more about Emeria.

[Slugline]{location="Tanjung Priok" date="1 January 1947"}Victor arrives
at Tanjung Priok with other recruits.

[Slugline]{date="1 October 1947" location="KNIL"}Victor is surprised to
be taken from Mapping department and assigned to Spoors office.

[Slugline]{date="1 October 1947" location="Kuntskring"}Victor meets
artists and writes about exhibitions.

[Slugline]{date="1 November 1947" location="Emeria Studio"}Victor meets
Emira at Kuntskring. She invites him to her studio on a pretense, and
seduces him.

[Slugline]{location="Emeria Studio" date="30 October 1947"}Emeria takes
Victor along (out of uniform) as she paints portraits of people
dislocated by Dutch.

[Slugline]{location="AB Bar" date="1 September 1947"}At the party to
celebrate the sale of the quinine, Ining shows himself to be a party
animal, buying rounds for his companions and flirting with the foreign
women. Bob and Boedi hustle him out of bar after he hits on American
colonels teenage daughter.

[Slugline]{date="2 November 1947" location="Emeria Salon"}Emeria's
assistant reveals that Dutch military and Republican artists would meet
in the back room of the salon.

[Slugline]{location="Raffles Hotel" date="March 1947"}Bob partners with
Hugh Savage, a Singapore-based expat to start Southeastern Airlines.

[Slugline]{date="1 March 1947" location="AB Bar"}Bobs Freeberg and
Walters agree to joint ownership of a war-surplus Dakota.

[Slugline]{date="1 April 1947" location="Manila Airport"}Bob relocates
missing Dakota

[Slugline]{location="KNIL" date="1 November 1947"}Victor Meets Robert
Koke at Spoors office

[Slugline]{date="17 December 1947" location="Manila Airport"}During a
routine radio contact with Jogja, Boedi is told that Ining and Mas Ded
were found dead of gunshot wounds at Ining's house.

[Slugline]{location="Maguwo" date="27 December 1947"}RI-002 departs for
Pekanbaru carrying 14 Republican officials and a coffin containing
Ining's remains.

[Slugline]{date="15 January 1948" location="Changi"}British officials
open Ining's coffin. They do not find guns, and allow RI-002 to depart,
obstensibly for Pekanbaru.

[Slugline]{location="KNIL" date="15 October 1947"}Spoor learns that
Espina is training guerrillas in Jogja.

[Slugline]{date="20 January 1948" location="KNIL"}Spoor reads that
Ining's death resulted from an arms deal gone disastrously wrong.Decides
to make stopping RI-002 a priority

[Slugline]{date="16 January 1948" location="tc"}Spoor vents his fury at
Bob for Ining debacle.

[Slugline]{location="Maguwo" date="15 March 1948"}Bob begins opium runs

[Slugline]{location="Maguwo" date="30 March 1948"}Bob is annoyed when
Bambang shows up late for opium run, forcing him to cancel the mission.

[Slugline]{date="15 April 1948" location="KNIL"}Spoor decides to
consider Freeberg a major drug smuggler, and orders his fighters to use
deadly force if they encounter RI-002.

[Slugline]{date="18 November 1988" location="Julia Residence"}Eddy
opposes Julia marrying a foreigner. Eddy has checked into Cameron's
background, and found he is penniless and with a spotty academic record,
though he excelled in journalism and seems to be a good writer. Eddy
promises to fulfill her dream of studying overseas. Julia says you don't
have the money. Eddy replies that he is making arrangements. Julia says
ok, as long as one of the arrangements is not marriage.

[Slugline]{date="19 November 1988"
location="Taman Sari Restaurant"}Julia is sitting in a restaurant with
Eric, a well-groomed, obviously affluent young man. Eric mentions his
surprise Julia's mother phoned his mother to suggest he take her to
dinner. Eric dominates the conversation, relating, in grandiose style,
how he is an essential component in the business deal that their
respective father's are cooking up. Julia wants more details about this
"business deal", but decides it would be better to remain silent. Julia
picks at her dinner and nods politely.

[Slugline]{location="Raffles Hotel" date="10 May 1948"}Savage does
nothing about SE Airways

[Slugline]{location="RI-002" date="15 April 1948"}Muharto smuggles gems
without Bob knowing.

[Slugline]{date="25 June 1948" location="RI-002"}Bob refuses Soekarno's
order to land on unsafe airfield

[Slugline]{location="Sumatra Airfield" date="28 June 1948"}Standing on
the wing speaking to an assembled crowd, Soekarno points to Bob in the
cockpit, proclaiming: "This is Bob Freeberg, a friend of all
Indonesians"

[Slugline]{date="30 June 1948" location="Maguwo"}Suryadarma orders Bob
to Sumatra on another mission. Bob refuses, and infuriates Suryadarma by
returning to Manila that day.

[Slugline]{location="Jalan Jaksa" date="16 December 1988"}Julia tries to
convince Cameron that Spoor was fighting corruption, not planning a
coup.

[Slugline]{date="16 December 1988" location="Kemang Mansion"}Julia is
infuriated to be mistaken for a bar girl at a Kemang party.

[Slugline]{date="15 August 1948" location="Maguwo"}Bob returns to Jogja
with both pilot and aircraft in good shape.

[Slugline]{location="Beringhardjo Market" date="27 December 1948"}Ani
gives Westerling a tongue lashing to divert attention while Muharto
swallows his air force identification.

[Slugline]{location="Pasar Beringharjo" date="1 December 1988"}Julia
tracks down Emiria, who now teaches art to children in a village on the
outskirts of Jogja.

[Slugline]{location="KNIL" date="1 September 1948"}Spoor orders a night
patrol not to engage a blockade running POAS flight because he is
informed that American and other civilians are passengers.

[Slugline]{date="19 September 1948" location="POAS"}Fowler believes he
spots Dutch fighters flanking him.

[Slugline]{date="20 September 1948" location="Hotel Merdeka"}Muharto
reconciles with Bob over a whiskey. Freeberg and Fowler complain about
Suryadarma withholding fuel allowances.

[Slugline]{location="Jogjakarta" date="27 December 1948"}Victor defects
into hills with friend of Emeria

[Slugline]{location="IPPHOS" date="10 December 1988"}Julia tells Victor
that Emeria was just using him to get information about Spoor.

[Slugline]{date="1 December 1988" location="Julia Residence"}Eddy
explains he is retiring, but has arranged to keep his security
clearance. He is doing security assessments for foreign companies by
stripping out classified data and putting the rest in context. Approved
all the way to the top.

[Slugline]{date="16 December 1988" location="National Library"}Julia
stumbles across a misfiled bound volume of BN from October 1948. An
article about the missing RI-002 is illustrated by what seems to be the
Dakota parked on an airfield guarded by a native KNIL soldier.

[Slugline]{location="RI-002" date="28 September 1948"}RI-002 drops
leaflets over Madiun.

[Slugline]{date="28 September 1948" location="Raffles Hotel"}Hugh Savage
admits that Southeastern Air is bankrupt, and Bob has lost his
investment.

[Slugline]{date="16 December 1988" location="Cameron Residence"}Col Eddy
is with Julia, and so reveals himself as her father. He says he has been
identified, and Bais soldiers are coming to arrest him. He must leave
now. Here is your car to your room, and then to the airport. Julia will
accompany you to make sure you go.
