**Cameron Assigned Story**: Cameron Bishop, a casually dressed American
in his mid-twenties who displays the intellectual arrogance of an
Ivy-league post-grad student, stands at the desk of a middle-aged
Indonesian reporter, whose shirt wrinkled and sweaty from a long day on
his beat. Cameron points to a sheet of paper on the desk and lectures
the older man in a condescending manner about his minor mistakes in
English grammar.

Sabam Siagian, a distinguished middle-aged Indonesian man wearing a
freshly pressed Safari suit, walks past, and notices the annoyance on
the reporter's face. Cameron sees Sabam and follows him into his office.
Sabam sits at a desk taking up most of the space of the cramped office,
almost disappearing behind precariously balanced piles of folders and
documents, and starts searching for something. Cameron tries to pitch a
story idea, but Sabam waves him off, reminding the American that he is a
foreigner working in a technical capacity as an English-language
consultant, and not an accredited correspondent. The government is very
strict on this matter, Sabam reminds him.

Then Sabam relents, looks through his papers, and pulls out a card,
handing it to Cameron. Sabam explains that an long-time friend, Petit
Muharto Kartodirdjo, a former Air Force officer, has an interesting
story to tell about an American blockade runner who mysteriously
vanished on 1 October 1948. The coming Saturday will mark the 40-year
anniversary of the disappearance. Since this is only a feature story in
a weekend edition about a historical incident, there is no harm in
letting Cameron do the interview. Besides, Sabam continues, no one else
has time to spare.

**Muharto First Interview**: Petit Muharto, a lively, dapper Indonesian
in his late 60s, is sitting with his wife Ani in their cosy living room
in the Jakarta suburbs when they hear the roar of a large motorcycle
approaching. Muharto, in jest, covers his ears, and is then surprised
when the motorcycle stops in front of their house. A moment later, there
is a knock on the door. Ani opens it to find Cameron, in jeans and
motorcycle boots, asking for Muharto. Once over his surprise at being
interviewed by a "Hell's Angel" Muharto tells of meeting Freeberg when
the latter had made an emergency landing on a remote beach and of
Freeberg being commissioned to fly for the Republic with the fictitious
registration of RI-002. Muharto emphasizes the value of the blockade
runs to the struggle for independence, and the respect and affection Bob
received from all Indonesians, from President Soekarno to the common
people of Jogjakarta.

**Muharto Promoted Out**: Muharto tells Cameron that he flew with
Freeberg until May 1948, when he was promoted to major and assigned to
headquarters. Four months later, Muharto was devastated to learn that
RI-002 had vanished while transporting Republican gold from Java to
safety in Sumatra ahead of an expected Dutch invasion.

**Crash Site**: Muharto finishes the narrative saying that the RI-002
wreckage was eventually discovered on a mountain in Sumatra in 1977. The
few fragments of human remains could not be identified, and no gold was
found. Muharto's expression as he finished his reminiscences convinces
Cameron that he regarded Freeberg as a close friend, and is seeking
closure about his mysterious disappearance. Muharto wonders that if he
had turned down promotion and had been with Bob on the final flight,
maybe it would not have ended in tragedy.

**Sabam Edits Cameron**: Cameron shows his draft of the story to Sabam,
who grunts his approval. However, he says, the piece needs some
background on Freeberg to flesh it out. He tells Cameron to read a book
he recently had stumbled across in the reference section of the newly
opened National Library.

**Into the Stacks**: At the National Library reference section, the
attendant sees Cameron walk in the door, greets him in halting English,
then disappears into a back room. He reappears moments later with Julia,
an attractive, bookish Indonesian woman in her early twenties, who asks,
in flawless English, what he is looking for. Cameron explains, and Julia
goes into the stacks, emerging a short time later with the book he
requested, along with some related material she thinks might be useful.

**Recruit to Revolution**: Cameron reads about the political situation
in post-war Indonesia, and the high regard the various foreign
diplomats, journalists, and academics felt held for Freeberg. However,
American government representatives in Batavia strongly disapproved of
Freeberg's blockade runs, regarding him as a borderline criminal.

**Coffee with Julia**: After an hour, Cameron wants to break for coffee.
As no beverages are allowed in the reference section, Julia escorts him
to the staff canteen. Julia tells Cameron about her desire to take her
master's degree in an American university. Cameron begins to tell Julia
of his own dreams, but, with a grin, Julia cuts him off saying: If I
want to know anything about you I'll just ask my dad\". At Cameron's
quizzical look,explains that her father is a colonel with the Army's
intelligence section, which is known to keep close tabs on the
activities of journalists.

**Syd Edits Cameron**: Cameron shows the draft of his story to his
workmate Syd Jardine, a chain-smoking, alcoholic former foreign
correspondent in his early sixties. Syd edits the piece with practiced
aplomb, and hands it back, telling Cameron that it should have a photo
of Freeberg himself (which Muharto does not have). He offers to cover
for Cameron at the copy desk so he can hop on his Harley and run to the
nearby IPPHOS photo agency, where his friend, Victor de Jong, manages
the archives. Syd is certain Victor can find a photo in an instant as he
has a "photographic memory".

**First Victor Interview**: At the IPPHOS office, the ground floor of a
building one inspection away from being condemned, Victor indeed finds a
photo of Freeberg after a brief search. Victor runs the office alone,
and sees few visitors, so he invites Cameron to stay for coffee. Victor
tells Cameron that had had been a Dutch army conscript who had defected
to the Indonesian side in the final days of the struggle. In Batavia he
had been posted in the survey department developing and analyzing field
photographs, but in his final year had been transfered to KNIL
headquarters as "official photographer", working directly under General
Simon Spoor, the commander of all colonial military forces. He had often
heard Spoor's voice rise in frustration as he is briefed about
Freeberg's daily blockade runs, which he seems to take as a personal
affront.

**Cameron finishes off**: Cameron returns to the Jakarta Post with the
story to find Sabam, in formal dress, standing beside Syd's desk. Sabam
is going to a diplomatic dinner and will return after midnight, so he is
putting Syd is in charge of putting the paper to bed. Syd takes the
photo and text pages from Cameron, and scribbles his initials as the
authorization to print. Then, with a sly grin, he takes two pages from
his desk drawer, signs them and gives both stories to a runner to take
to typesetting.

**Sex Crazed Fiends**: The following afternoon, Sabam storms out of his
office and strides to the copy desk, waving that day's edition. He
points to an article buried on an inside page with the headline:
*Ladyboy Molested By Sex-Crazed Gang*, and shouts: "This is a family
newspaper!"

**Passed on Assigment**: Sabam turns to Cameron to say that Muharto had
phoned him to thank him for the story. Cameron beams, and takes the
opportunity to ask Sabam for another assignment. Sabam grunts, looks
about the berate Cameron as well, then relents. He gives Cameron his
invitation to a reception for visiting Harvard alumni at the house of
Boediardjo, a former Air Force senior officer and government minister,
telling Cameron to write a puff piece about the event. Before Cameron
can speak, Sabam says: "Don't complain. At least you will get a good
meal. You look like you need one."

**Cameron meets Boedi**: At the reception Cameron is warmly welcomed by
Boediardjo, a short, heavy-set man in his late sixties displaying the
Javanese statesman's ideal of blending commanding authority with refined
manners and easy grace. When left alone, Cameron notes the tasteful --
and clearly expensive -- art on the walls and a high-end audio system.
As the party progresses, Cameron realizes that he is the same Boediardjo
who served as RI-002 radio operator. Cameron's urges the host to regale
his guests with tales of adventure running the Dutch blockade.

**Detained in Bangkok**: Boedi gets the most laughs with the story of
RI-002 transporting two Republican aviators, Halim and Iswandi, to
Bangkok to purchase a twin-prop airplane that will become RI-003. Dutch
authorities pressure the Thai government to detain Freeberg as a
blockade runner. The Thais briefly detain Freeberg in a comfortable
hotel room, but the Indonesian crew must find their own accommodation.
They can only afford rooms in a bar district. Boedi is delighted, but
Halim and Iswandi are appalled. Both are engaged to be married, and
worry that the families of their respective fiances will learn that they
have stayed in such a disreputable environment. While Boedi hung out in
the bar, Halim and Iswandi were shopping for household essentials not
available in blockaded Jogjakarta.

**Aviation Brotherhood**: The guests depart soon after dinner to catch
an early flight, and Boedi invites Cameron to stay so he can ask him
about Muharto's investigations. Boedi tells Cameron of his acceptance
into the Aviation Brotherhood of expatriate pilots. Through this
association, Boedi learns that Freeberg is embroiled in a dispute with
another pilot, Bob Walters, over ownership of the Dakota now known as
RI-002. Boedi tells self-depreciating stories of being stranded petheir
hardship

**Two Audiophiles**: Boedi wishes Cameron the best on his investigation.
He will be doing the Air Force, and Indonesia, a service by raising
awareness of the contributions of Freeberg and Muharto to the nation.
Boedi says he is welcome at any time, and he has many more stories to
tell.

**Julia Rides a Harley**: Cameron returns to the library for more
research. He tells Julia that the stories told by Boedi suggest that
Freeberg had been a man of conflicting interests helps by translating
headlines in Dutch newspapers. Afterward, they realize that they had
both arranged to meet friends at the Hotel Hilton. Cameron offers to
take her there on his Harley Davidson.

**Bule Kaya**: At the hotel, Julia's friends tell her to go after
Cameron. If he rides a Harley he must be rich. They tease her by saying
that as the daughter of "Honest Eddy", one of the few senior army
officers who is not corrupt, this would be the only way she could afford
to pay her own bill.

**Arts Circle**: Cameron takes Julia to visit Victor to learn more about
Spoor's efforts to stop the blockade runs. Victor begins by telling them
of Emiria Soenassa, the only Indonesian modern artist of the day, who
fell in love with Victor after he had praised her work in a newspaper
article. Through Emeria, Victor meets prominent Republican figures, who
Spoor and the colonial government seek to portray as opportunistic thugs
and bandits. Victor is astounded to discover that most are well-educated
with sophisticated and pragmatic political beliefs.

**Dog Knotted**: Sabam berates Syd for slipping into the previous
night's edition a story of an adulterous village couple who, upon being
discovered, had been so humiliated that they remained in tight embrace
until the local *dukun* could separate them with incantations and
massage oil. Nevertheless, Sabam asks Syd into his office for a
closed-door discussion, the third time that week. Cameron knows they are
working on a big story, and feels annoyed at being left out.

**Julia Researches Emiria**: Intrigued by Victor's stories of Emeria,
Julia searches the stacks for articles mentioning her. Fluent in Dutch,
Julia is able to read obscure news reports and journals in the Batavia
press. A portrait emerges of an independent, charismatic young woman
whose mixed parentage of a Dutch businessman and a Javanese aristocrat,
along with considerable artistic talent, grants her entry into all
levels of Dutch and Indonesian society in Batavia.

**At The Earthquake**: Syd takes Cameron to the Earthquake Bar for a
drink He introduces Cameron to the owner, Sanyoto, an Air Force drill
sergeant during the revolution and retired fixer for a large foreign
company. Sanyoto maintains wide contacts in the highest levels of
government and the military, so the Earthquake is popular with senior
military officers and government officials. Sanyoto tells Cameron he is
always welcome here, as long as he minds his manners and doesn't
"needle" any of his regular guests.

**Crash Of RI003**: During a routine radio contact, Boedi learns that
RI-003 has crashed in Malaysia.

**Company Man**: Boedi pokes affection fun at his former comrade for his
belief that Freeberg's friend Tom Lee would treat them to drinks and
dinner out of kindness for their predicament. However, to Boedi, it had
been obvious that Lee had been an intelligence operative pumping them
for information about the Republic.

**Victor Meets Robert Koke**: Victor tells Cameron about the occasion
when American consul general Walter Foote brought another American,
Robert Koke, to meet Spoor. While they wait for Spoor to finish a
telephone call, Koke remarks about the photographic equipment on
Victor's desk, saying that he had been a cinematographer in Hollywood
before coming to Bali and opening a hotel catering A-list world
travelers. Victor recounts this meeting to Emeria and friends a few days
afterward. One of them recognizes Koke as an intelligence agent active
in Java and Bali during the post-war operations to repatriate interned
Americans.

**Cameron catches on**: Victor shows Cameron the photo of Robert Koke,
and tells of his suspicion that Koke had been "The Cool American" in
Batavia. Cameron ties this in with Boedi's assessment of Tom Lee, and
comes to the conclusion that Spoor had been plotting with the newly
formed CIA.

**Julia disagrees**: Julia researches Robert Koke, finding that Koke had
lived in Bali before the war, running a hotel and introducing surfing to
the island, and had left evidence that he had supported the Indonesian
struggle for Independence.

**Conspiracy Theorists**: Cameron and Muharto now meet frequently to
discuss their conspiracy theories. Muharto develops a detailed technical
explanation of how a single bomber could have found and intercepted
RI-002, and cherry picks coincidences and vague personal connections to
bolster his theory.

**Julia Admires Emeria**: Julia continues her research into Emeria's
life and times by tracking down and interviewing people mentioned

**Rice Kitchen**: Ani tells of her growth from a naive teenager thinking
only of making a household to a committed champion of the people,
volunteering to teach and to feed the swelling population of refugees.

**Bar Fight**: An anak jendral brings two foreign visitors to the
Earthquake. Cameron joins the table, and is soon boasting about his
investigations. He says that the two likeliest solutions to the mystery,
that the CIA arranged to steal the gold to fund Spoors coup, or that a
military unit found the gold at the crash site, would be equally awesome
stories that would make his career. A group of anak jendral at an
adjoining table overhear, and are offended. They ambush Cameron after he
leaves the bar. As they start to land punches, Sanyoto appears, alone.
He whacks the ringleader on his nose, drawing blood. The bleeding kid
threatens to have his father close the bar down. The following day,
Cameron picks up Syd at the Earthquake, who is having a drink before
work. A staffer carries in a case full of top-shelf whiskey, which
Sanyoto says is from the father, a two-star general. Cameron lifts a
bottle and whistles, saying that this is an expensive apology. Not
really, Sanyoto replies, if you notice there is no excise sticker on the
bottle.

**Black Flights**: Boediardjo tells Cameron that Freeberg had been under
enormous stress in early 1948. Suryadarma was forcing him to transport
Republican opium to Bukittinggi. If intercepted, the Dutch would have
jailed him for decades as a drug smuggler. He was also in significant
financial distress because of his failed attempt to start his own
airline. At 27, Freeberg's hair was already turning gray.

**Beres Sayang**: Colonel Eddy tells Julia of his guilt in not being
able to fulfill the dreams of his only child. He tells Julia to start
applying to universities in Europe and America. When Julia asks where
the tuition money is coming from, Eddy holds up his hand and says: \"
Beres Sayang ", meaning she should not worry. Julia replies:" Asal aku
nggak di jodohin \", as long as it does not involve an arranged
marriage.

**Date With Eric**: The following evening, Julia goes on a date with
Eric, which as set up by her mother. Eric dominates the conversation
with boasting about the deal their respective fathers are making to
supply "insider" information to foreign stock market brokers supposedly
from Colonel Eddy's intelligence services. Julia knows full when that he
father would be shot for leaking any intelligence information, so this
must be a scam. Julia with a Bruce Rappaport-style American stock
hustler to use "classified" military information to artificially pump up
the share price of Indonesian companies in advance of capital market
deregulation. Julia knows that her father has no such information, and
so calls deal a scam. Julia objects that this is corruption, something
General Eddy has never done during his career. Eric dismisses her
concern, assuring her: "It isn't corruption to take money from
foreigners."

**Expat Party**: Cameron takes Julia to an expat party in Kemang, and
she is mistaken for a bar girl. Julia takes Cameron to a far corner of
the garden and screams at him in fury and humiliation, saying that all
foreigners think Indonesian women who hang around foreigners are either
household servants or hookers.

**Major Desk Jockey**: Boedi reveals that Muharto had not been
"promoted" out of RI-002. Instead, Freeberg had requested he be
reassigned after an incident where Muharto had smuggled gems to Manila
to buy guns -- all without Freeberg's knowledge.

**At the lapo**: That evening invites Cameron and Syd for a late meal of
pork and beer at a batak warung nearby. Sabam tells Syd and Cameron of
the Deppen call.Cameron presses Sabam to give him details. Sabam
explains that Army officers are suspected of pumping up the IPO values
of some companies by providing insider information gleaned from the
extensive military surveillance network.

**Cameron Spills the Beans**: In an unguarded (and unclothed) moment,
Cameron tells Julia about the Jakarta Post investigations. Julia
realizes that this must be the deal her father is involved in.

**Julia confronts Eddy**: Julia begs her father not to sully his
reputation as "Honest Eddy" by participating in capital market
manipulation, even though it means she will not be able to study
overseas. Eddy tells her not to worry, forcing Julia to reveal that she
knows the Jakarta Post is investigating.

**Juilius Interview**: Cameron uses his Jakarta Post credentials to gain
access to Julius Tahija. He asks some perfunctory questions about
foreign investment, then changes the subject to the revolution, and the
time Tahija worked for Spoor. Tahija is surprised at the question, but
revels in the opportunity to relive those exciting times. Cameron
mentions Victor. Tahija grins, and tells Cameron that Victor had been a
"Useful Idiot", an intelligence asset Spoor used to keep tabs on the
Republican intellectuals in Batavia through is supposed clandestine
relationship with Emeria.

**Dreaded Phone Call**: Sabam receives a dreaded telephone call from
Deppen late in the afternoon. Though the voice on the other end suggests
to Sabam that he is wasting his time pursuing what is obviously a false
story, Sabam knows that the Jakarta Post is within a hair's breadth of
being shut down.

**Sabam Furious**: Cameron enters Sabam's office to find his boss
white-faced and shaken. He turns on Cameron in fury for interviewing
Julius Tahija without authorization.

**Six Hours in Jogja**: Cameron and Julia accompany Muharto and Ani to
Jogja, where they must attend family business. They all stay in the
rambling colonial house of Ani's aunt: the Muhartos in the guest room,
Julia in a large, pleasant room recently vacated by a daughter, and
Cameron in the only other room available, a servant's quarters in the
back.

**Westerling Sweep**: While visiting a market in to buy batik, Ani
recounts to Julia the evening 40 years before when she and her husband
were confronted by Westerling himself. Marshalling all the contempt and
entitlement that is the heritage of high-born Javanese women, Ani gave
the astonished Westerling a thorough tongue-lashing, distracting
attention while Muharto swallowed his Air Force identification document.

**Julia Finds Emeria**: Julia slips away and follows a lead she
encountered during her research; a brief mention of a female artist
named Emeria, but with a Dutch surname, who lives on the outskirts of
Jogja. See contacts the reporter, claiming to be an arts researcher, and
gets the address. Julia goes alone and finds that it is, indeed, Emeria
Soenassa. Emeria reveals that after independence she had gone to the
Netherlands on a "colonial guilt" scholarship and had married a Dutch
academic who had been one of the voices pushing for Indonesian
independence. On her husband's death she moved back to Jogja, where she
still has many friends. Asked why she abandoned Victor; Emiria replied
that you always have to choose sides."It was war. You have to choose
sides."

**Spite Their Face**: In August, Boedi engineers a reconciliation
between Freeberg and Muharto. As they all drink whiskey at the Hotel
Merdeka, Freeberg vents his frustration at Suryadarma's imperious
attitude and broken promises. .

**Julia Finds Photo**: Julia finds a photo of RI-002 seemingly guarded
by Dutch soldier. She shows it to Cameron and Victor, who recognizes the
airfield from a survey photograph he processed 40 years before. But he
is certain the runway, meant for fighters, is too short for a Dakota.
But Cameron remembers from the first Muharto interview that Bob had
landed on Karangendah on the CALI blockade run.

**Syd suggests a field trip**: Cameron discusses the photograph with
Syd, who agrees that the only way to be sure is to go to Karangendah and
see if the hills in the background match the photograph. Syd says the
Sabam will be out of town for a few days, and that he is willing to
cover for him at the copy desk.

**Sanyoto suggest Anwar**: Sanyoto suggests Cameron look up Anwar Congo,
a (retired) gangster who Sanyoto had had extensive dealings with while
working as a fixer for an oil company in Sumatra.

**Syds Triple Shift**: The two other copy editors take advantage of
Sabam's absence to go AWOL themselves, leaving Syd as a single-fighter
on the copy desk. He works three triple shifts, drinking whiskey for
fuel and getting his vitamins from chain-smoking cigarettes.

**Karangendah Raid**: Cameron and Julia fly to Palembang and drive to
Karangendah. But the runway, now a tank training ground, is not visible
from the road. Their driver knows Anwar Congo, who is pleased to meet
friends of Syd. He arranges for his two visitors to be smuggled onto the
base at Karangendah, where they confirm that this was the location of
the photo of RI-002. When they return, Anwar reveals that KNIL officers
had paid him to smuggle a substantial quantity of gold to Singapore.
Anwar also introduces Cameron to several men who had been employed at
Karangendah in menial civilian jobs. They attest that they had seen the
crew in captivity. However, no one remembers seeing Freeberg.

**Syd Dies**: Cameron returns from Karangendah on the morning flight and
goes directly to Syd's room to tell him the news. He finds his friend
dead in his favorite reading chair, a book on his lap and a glass of
whiskey at his side.

**Sabam Fires Cameron**: Sabam demands an explanation for Cameron's
absence, which he is certain led to Syd's demise from overwork. Cameron
admits to going to Karangendah, and his illegal entry into the army
base. On thin ice with Deppen because of corruption story, Sabam has no
choice but to fire Cameron and cancel his visa, effective immediately.
Cameron has 24 hours to leave Indonesia.

**Boedi Not Home**: Cameron visits Boedi at the regular time in the late
afternoon when, in Javanese custom, visitors are received. However, the
servant tells him that Boedi is not at home, though Cameron can hear one
of Boedi's favorite classical music pieces drifting from the salon.

**Victor told truth**: Cameron tells Victor that Spoor was investigating
corruption, not planning a coup with the CIA. And that Emeria was just
using him to get information about Spoor.

**Cameron Says Goodbye**: Visiting Muharto and Ani on his way to the
airport, Cameron and Muharto piece together the events of the last
flight of RI-002 based on what they have learned. Freeberg's role in
this remains unclear. Cameron decides to comfort his friend by falsely
claiming that Anwar Congo had seen Freeberg being led away in chains
with signs of having been assaulted.

**Airport Farewell**: Cameron offers to marry Julia so she make realize
her dream of leaving Indonesia and getting her grad degree from an
American university. Julia turns him down, explaining that Sabam has
offered her a job as sub editor at the Jakarta Post. She will work there
for a few years, then think about continuing her studies. .\
\|
