[SLUGLINE]{name="Bob Lands On Beach" date="08 June 1947"
category="standalone"} American aviator Bob Freeberg lands his unmarked
Dakota cargo plane on remote Cilotok beach in southwest Java. As
soldiers approach the airplane, guns ready, he shouts out the only
Indonesian words he knows: Captain Petit Muharto

[SLUGLINE]{name="Muharto Introduces Freeberg" date="28 June 1988"
category="interview"} American freelance journalist Cameron Bishop
interviews retired Air Force Major Petit Muharto about his experiences
with Bob Freeberg as co-pilot of RI-002.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Surprise Message" date="08 June 1947" category="scene"}
Muharto is astounded to receive a message that a foreign pilot has
landed on a remote beach and asked for him by name.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Muharto Flies to Tasik" date="7 June 1947"
category="past"} Muharto flies to Tasik, thinking about who the mystery
pilot might be. He remembers his final blockade run two months
previously, with Bob Freeberg as captain.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Third Cali Run" date="31 March 1947" category="past"}
Muharto leads a blockade run with Bob Freeberg. Amid poor visibility
over Java, Bob demonstrates his piloting skill by diving through a break
in the clouds

[SLUGLINE]{name="Landing At Karangendah" date="31 March 1947"
category="past"} Freeberg tests the usability of a Japanese airstrip by
simply landing on it.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Drop Over Bukittinggi" date="31 March 1947"
category="past"} Freeberg expertly flies through highland valleys to
drop two air force engineers directly onto a damaged runway near
Bukittinggi.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Off the Beach" date="09 June 1947" category="past"}
Muharto and Pang inspire villages to build a bamboo runway so RI-002 can
take off before spotted by a Dutch patrol.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Fictitious Registration" date="10 June 1947"
category="past"} Suryadarma commissions Bob to fly a cargo of high-value
quinine to Manila and assigns the registration RI-002 to the unmarked
Dakota.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Come What May" date="10 June 1947" category="past"}
Muharto, Boedi, and Pang are anxious about their reception in Manila,
but take inspiration from Freeberg, who flew to Java with inadequate
charts and no idea of what he would find there.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Setting The Flaps" date="10 June 1947" category="past"}
Freeberg asks Muharto to control the flaps for the landing in Manila.
Muharto nervously sets the flaps to full, causing RI-002 to make a
sickining drop.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Pilot Officer" date="10 June 1947" category="past"} At
Manila airport Bob is told to identify his co-pilot, a requirement for
twin-engine aircraft on long-haul flights. Muharto gambles the Filipino
officers cannot read Indonesian and so falsely translates the rank on
his Air Force identification as Pilot Officer.

[SLUGLINE]{name="VT-CLA Crashes" date="29 July 1947" category="past"}
While celebrating the victory in courts, Bob Muharto, Pang, and Boedi
hear the news that an Indian blockade runner has been shot down on
approach to Maguwo.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Non Stop To Jogja" date="21 September 1947"
category="past"} RI-002 secretly flies to Jogja without stopping for
refueling. Flying over Java at night and minutes from running out of
fuel, Muharto navigates by remembering a schooldays geography lesson.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Republican Lifeline" date="28 June 1988"
category="interview"} Muharto tells Cameron of the critical missions
Freeberg undertook in late 1947.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Bob Meets Soekarno" date="07 October 1947"
category="past"} Muharto takes Freeberg on a late-afternoon walk around
Jakarta. While admiring the architecture of the Presidential Palace,
Freeberg is astounded to meet President Soekarno himself, who thanks him
for his service to the Republic.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Bob Trains Bambang" date="04 October 1947"
category="past"} Bob checks out Bambang's qualifications to be co-pilot
of RI-002. Problems arise because of Bambang's weak command of English.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Flying The GOC" date="30 October 1947" category="past"}
Bob flies three United Nations representatives to Sumatra, where they
will assess popular support for the Republic.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Into The Typhoon" date="15 November 1947"
category="past"} Freeberg flies into a severe storm to evade detection
by a Dutch fighter. He reassures a terrified Muharto by saying when a
Navy test pilot he would fly into typhoons.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Last Corned Beef" date="21 October 1947"
category="past"} Bob invites Muharto to join him for dinner at the Hotel
Merdeka. Bob is embarrassed when served the last can of corned beef left
by the GOC delegates.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Mission To Bagiuo" date="30 November 1947"
category="past"} Bob flies a team of Republican officials and
technocrats from Maguwo to a United Nation's conference in the
Philippines to make the case for Indonesian independence.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Muharto Promoted" date="15 May 1948" category="past"}
Suryadarma gives Muharto the good news that he is being promoted to
major and reassigned. The bad news, at least according to Muharto, is
that his new position is administrative and he will be piloting a desk.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Initial Searches" date="5 July 1988" category="past"}
Muharto tells Cameron of the disappearance of RI-002, and the discovery
of the wreckage 30 years later.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Sixth Coffin" date="29 July 1977" category="past"}
Airmen load five flag-draped coffins onto a truck, but leave behind the
sixth coffin, larger than the others and with a flag.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Muharto Regrets" date="28 June 1988"
category="interview"} Muharto tells Cameron that if he had flown with
Freeberg on that last flight it might not have ended in tragedy.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Syd Edits Cameron" date="29 June 1988"
category="present"} Syd Jardine, a retired foreign correpondent living
in Jakarta, edits Cameron's interview. He remarks that Freeberg comes
across as a white savior, and suggests Cameron do his own research to
flesh out his character and motives.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Cameron Meets Julia" date="30 June 1988"
category="research"} In the restricted histrical archives of the
National Library, Cameron meets Julia Suryakusuma, an attractive,
bookish woman in her early 20s, who retrieves materials from the stacks
and assists him by sight translating Dutch-language newspaper articles.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Cobley Threatens Freeberg" date="08 March 1948"
category="past"} British aviator Richard Cobley threatens to damage
RI-002 if Freeberg does not share his aviation contracts with the
Republic.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Coffee With Julia" date="30 June 1988"
category="scene"} Cameron has coffee with Julia, who casually informs
him that her father is a military intelligence officer.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Muharto Thanks Cameron" date="5 July 1988"
category="present"} Muharto visits Cameron at the Jakarta Times to thank
him for the article.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Adventures in Archives" date="5 July 1988"
category="interview"} Muharto tells Cameron and Sid of the frustrations
he encountered trying to find clues to solve the mystery in official
archives and libraries.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Crash Site Discovery" date="17 April 1977"
category="past"} Two farmers lead Air Force investigators to the RI-002
crash site, where they find human remains, but no gold.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Muharto Investigates" date="04 January 1980"
category="past"} Muharto writes to his contacts in the Air Force and to
the officers who participated in the crash-site investigation, but
receives vague, non-committal replies -- or only silence.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Syd Offers Advice" date="5 July 1988"
category="interview"} Syd Jardine suggests that discovering who might
have had the motivation and ability to transport and sell the gold could
solve the mystery of RI-002. Cameron tells Muharto that he knows just
the person who could help them do the research.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Cameron Interviews Airmen" date="10 July 1988"
category="interview"} Muharto organizes a meeting of former RI-002 crew,
who tell stories of flying with Freeberg in October to December 1947.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Kalimantan Paratroopers" date="17 October 1947"
category="past"} Bob and Boedi fly ten paratroopers to be dropped near
an insurgent stronghold in the forests of Kalimantan.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Grounded in Bangkok" date="20 October 1947"
category="past"} Freeberg flies two Indonesian aviators to Bangkok,
where they will purchase and fly back an Avro Anson. Under pressure from
the Dutch, the Thais detain Freeberg, but soon release him and allow
RI-002 to depart.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Julia Translates Newspapers" date="6 July 1988"
category="research"} Julia is eager to assist Cameron to solve the
mystery, and sight-tranlates Dutch-language newspaper articles printed
in the days after the disappearance.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Spoor has no clue" date="05 October 1948"
category="past"} General Spoor claims ignorance of the fate of RI-002
and grows visibly annoyed when the reporter, Jan Boon, presses him.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Julia Suggests Victor" date="6 July 1988"
category="wrapper"} Julia suggests they speak to Victor de Jong, a Dutch
conscript who was posted in Spoor's office and stayed on to become an
Indonesian after independence.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Cameron Meets Victor" date="7 July 1988"
category="interview"} Cameron interviews Victor, who often heard Spoor
raging about the foreign pilots invading Dutch East Indies airspace.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Spoor Rages" date="18 October 1947" category="past"}
Victor overhears Spoor raging at reports of RI-002 dropping paratroopers
over Kalimantan. He directs his staff to pressure regional aviation
authorities to ground RI-002.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Thai Authorities Released Freeberg"
date="18 October 1947" category="past"} Spoor is furious when he learns
that Thai authorities have released Freeberg.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Photo of Emeria" date="7 July 1988"
category="interview"} Victor comes across a photo of Emiria Soenassa.
Julia asks who she, but Victor says she is not important and files the
photo away.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Cameron offers a ride" date="7 July 1988"
category="scene"} Julia tells Cameron that she is meeting friends, all
daughters of generals or high officials, for coffee at the Mandarin
Hotel. That hotel is also the watering hole for the foreign press, so
Cameron offers to give her a lift and then meet his colleagues for a
beer.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Julia and her friends" date="7 July 1988"
category="present"} Julia's friends urge her to get closer to Cameron,
noting that her father, who unlike theirs, is only mildly corrupt and
cannot afford to send Julia to graduate school in America.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Manila Memories" date="12 July 1988"
category="interview"} Muharto and Cameron interview Pang Soeparto, who
is praises Muharto for defeating the Dutch in court over the quinine.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Javanese Celebrities" date="11 June 1947"
category="past"} Muharto awakes to discover that he and his crew are
celebrities, with several newspapers giving front-page treatment to
RI-002 and the Javanese Crew.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Quinine Case" date="13 June 1947" category="past"} Bob
and Muharto challenge the Dutch claim over the quinine cargo in a Manila
court.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Madras Curry" date="15 July 1947" category="past"} The
boys are penniless as they wait to sell the quinine, so Freeberg buys
them a bowl of curry each day, insisting that they are his
responsibility until he can return them to Java.

[SLUGLINE]{name="De Facto Liaison" date="15 August 1947"
category="past"} Muharto and Pang arrange with Primitivo to bring Ining
to Jogja to train youth militias.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Wins Quinine Case" date="29 July 1947" category="past"}
The judge rules in favor of Muharto and Pang and releases the quinine to
them. The Dutch protest, but the ruling is final.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Tom Lee Treats" date="15 August 1947" category="past"}
Tom Lee treats Pang, Boedi and Muharto for beers and dinner, pumping
them for information about the political situation in the Republic.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Money For Nothing" date="04 August 1947"
category="past"} Muharto attempts to pay for their meals at Madras Curry
with an honorarium from giving a talk about the Indonesian struggle for
freedom. Bob chastises him for "taking money for nothing".

[SLUGLINE]{name="Party Animal" date="15 September 1947" category="past"}
At a party to celebrate the sale of the quinine, Ining shows himself to
be a party animal, buying rounds for his companions and flirting with
the foreign women. Freeberg and Boedi hustle Ining out of the AB bar
after he hits on the teenage daughter of an American colonel.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Pang Mentions Ining" date="12 July 1988"
category="interview"} At the mention of Espina, Muharto's face clouds,
and tells Pang they must be going now. Cameron asks Muharto why they are
in such a hurry, but he does not respond.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Julia Researches Emeria" date="15 July 1988"
category="research"} Julia's researches Emeria in the art publications
from the period. learning that she had been was the first female
Indonesian painter of modern art, with extensive connections at the
highest levels of both Dutch and Indonesian society.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Defending Hendra" date="1 October 1947"
category="past"} Emeria gives a forceful defense of Hendra Gunawan and
his heroic depictions of Indonesian freedom fighters at an exhibition in
the Kuntzkrieg.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Finding Hendra" date="20 July 1988"
category="research"} Julia looks for mentions of Hendra in local
publications, finding nothing. She eventually stumbles upon an article
in a foreign arts review, which provides enough clues for her to
discover Hendra's current location.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Cameron at the Earthquake" date="15 July 1988"
category="present"} Syd introduces Cameron to Sanyoto, who is delighted
to help uncover the truth about RI-002 by allowing Cameron to interview
his guests.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Cameron Interviews Sudaryono" date="15 July 1988"
category="interview"} Sudaryono tells Cameron of the rivalry between the
two best cadet pilots in the class: Bambang Sudarmadji and Moeljono.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Bambang Saptoadji Messes Landing"
date="04 February 1947" category="past"} Bambang Saptoadji messes up a
landing during an air show, severely damaging one of the Republic's few
serviceable aircraft.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Crushing Disappointment" date="04 July 1947"
category="past"} Bambang is crushed when his fighter is grounded minutes
before he was to take off for the raid on Ambarrawa.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Southeastern Airlines" date="04 March 1947"
category="past"} Bob partners with Singapore-based businessman Hugh
Savage to start Southeastern Airlines.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Two Bobs buy a Dakota" date="04 March 1947"
category="past"} Bob Freeberg joins with Bob Walters to purchase a
war-surplus Dakota. They agree to equal ownership of the craft, and will
equally contribute to making it airworthy.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Bob Orders Suits" date="1 February 1947"
category="past"} Freeberg realizes that as a businessmen Bob must dress
in more than flight gear. With post-war shortages driving up the cost of
textiles in Southeast Asia, he decides to order Palm Beach suits from
the US.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Missing Dakota" date="01 April 1947" category="past"}
Bob returns to Manila to find the jointly owned Dakota is missing. he
discovers the location, and moves it himself to another strip on the
outskirts of Manila.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Political Artist" date="21 July 1988"
category="interview"} Julia visits Hendra, who tells her of a
frightening incident at Emeria's Salon.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Hiding Hendra" date="10 October 1947" category="past"}
Emeria dismisses a squad of native KNIL soldiers looking for Hendra, who
is hiding in her bedroom.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Eddy Interrogates Cameron" date="20 July 1988"
category="present"} Sanyoto introduces Cameron to Colonel Eddy without
disclosing his relationship to Julia. After a few minutes of
conversation, Cameron begins to feel he is being skillfully
interrogated.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Eddy Warns Julia" date="9 July 1988"
category="present"} Pak Eddy lectures Julia about entering into a
relationship with a penniless foreigner.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Bibit Bebet Bobot" date="12 October 1988"
category="present"} Eddy tells Julia that she must be careful in her
choice of a future husband.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Eddy Promises Funding" date="21 July 1988"
category="present"} Colonel Eddy promises to make arrangdments to fund
Julia's post-grad. Julia hopes that the arrangements to not include an
arranged marriage to another anak jendral.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Eric explains corruption" date="22 July 1988"
category="present"} Julia has an arranged dinner with Eric, son of a
family friend. Eric boasts that their respective parents are cooking up
a business deal involving selling insider information to foreign
investors.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Cameron Interviews George Rueneker" date="21 July 1988"
category="interview"} George Rueneker tells Cameron the tragic story of
Captain Espina.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Ining Will Train Students" date="07 October 1947"
category="past"} Muharto installs Ining in a house on the slopes of
Mount Merapi.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Military Babysitter" date="21 October 1947"
category="past"} George Rueneker is disturbed to see the anger in their
faces as Ining yells at the recruits.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Ining Asks To Return" date="30 November 1947"
category="past"} Ining writes a letter to Major Primitivo begging to be
recalled, but arrives at Maguwo seconds too late to give to Muharto.
George Rueneker asks Mas Ded to escort him back to Jalan Jetis.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Ining Is Dood" date="04 December 1947" category="past"}
During a routine radio contact with Jogja, Boedi is told that Ining and
Mas Ded were found dead of gunshot wounds at Ining's house.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Painful Memories" date="22 July 1988"
category="interview"} Cameron tells Muharto of his interview with George
Rueneker, and cajoles him into telling of the events following the death
of Ining.

[SLUGLINE]{name="RI-003 Crashes" date="27 December 1947"
category="past"} RI-003 crashes on a beach in Malaya. Dutch embassy
representatives join the British investigation team at the crash site,
insisting that the aircraft had been attempting to smuggle guns into
Sumatra.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Primitivo Accuses Muharto" date="18 December 1947"
category="past"} Muharto reports Ining's death to Primitivo. Muharto is
astounded when the major accuses Muharto and his late brother of being
clandestine communists, and detains Muharto for interrogation.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Back to Jogja" date="24 December 1947" category="past"}
RI-002 returns to Jogja so Muharto can deal with the fallout from
Ining's death.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Grounded In Changi" date="29 December 1947"
category="past"} RI-002 flies Ining to Manila, but is forced by bad
weather to land in Singapore. Dutch representatives on the island
pressure the British into grounding the Dakota.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Onward To Manila" date="15 January 1948"
category="past"} British officials open Ining's coffin, searching for
contraband. Finding none, and with RI-002 brought up to minimal
airworthiness standards, they grant Bob permission to depart, to the
great annoyance of the Dutch.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Cameron Suspects Robert Koke" date="21 October 1988"
category="present"} Victor tells Cameron of Robert Koke, who his
Indonesian friends identified as a CIA operative.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Spoor Dumbfounded" date="28 December 1947"
category="past"} Spoor is dumbfounded when he reads that RI-003 was not
running guns, but household items such as dinner plates and cutlery.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Newspaper Calls Ining" date="15 January 1948"
category="past"} Spoor reads an article in a Manila newspaper
speculating that Ining's death resulted from an arms deal gone
disastrously wrong. He decides to make stopping the blockade runners a
priority.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Spoor Meets Koke" date="15 October 1947"
category="past"} Victor sees Robert Koke arrive with Walter Foote. He
hears Koke speaking fluent Indonesian to a local soldier.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Weekend in Jogja" date="1 August 1988"
category="present"} Muharto and Cameron travel to Jogjakarta: Muharto on
the train and Cameron on his Harley. Cameron arrives first, and visits
the Affandi Musuem.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Cameron Meets Affandi" date="1 August 1988"
category="interview"} Cameron meets Affandi, who tells him of his
activities as a painter during the struggle for independence.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Propaganda Paintings" date="4 August 1947"
category="past"} Affandi and Hendra crouch in the foliage a hundred
meters from Dutch outpost. When Affandi stands to get a better view, the
soliders spot him, and laugh.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Captured Spy" date="15 October 1988"
category="interview"} Cameron notices a realistic portrait of a young
man crouched against a wall in a posture of defeat. Affandi explains he
had been a teenager accused of spying for the Dutch and summarily
executed moments after he had finished the sketch for the painting.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Affandi's Gift" date="1 August 1988"
category="interview"} Affandi grabs a sketch pad, dashes off a
self-portrait, signs it, and hands it Cameron, explaining that it is a
gift for Boedi to thank him for sending him a new friend.

[SLUGLINE]{name="With Mbah Marijan" date="2 August 1988"
category="present"} Cameron and Muharto visit a guru on Mount Merapi to
seek spiritual support for the success of their investigation.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Aviation Museum" date="2 August 1988"
category="interview"} Muharto takes Cameron to the Air Force museum, a
re-purposed hanger filled with decommissioned aircraft and other
exhibits. Muharto points to a model of the Zogling training glider, and
tells Cameron of the time he pulled rank and flew the Zogling himself.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Flying the Zogling" date="04 September 1946"
category="past"} Muharto pulls rank and commandeers the Zogling training
glider pulled by a Harley Davidson engine. When he lands, Suryadarma is
waiting, and angrily orders him back to his desk.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Museum Trance" date="2 August 1988" category="present"}
Muharto goes into trance when he handles a piece of RI-002 wreckage in
the Aviation Museum.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Cameron Meets Samuel" date="15 August 1988"
category="present"} Sanyoto introduces Cameron to keroncong musician
Samuel Quiko, who has interesting stories to tell about the revolution.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Julia Learns of Samuel Quiko" date="16 August 1988"
category="present"} Cameron tells Julia of meeting Samuel Quiko. Julia
wants to interview him, but Cameron dismisses the suggestion not
relevant to investigating RI-002.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Samuel Quiko" date="18 August 1988"
category="interview"} Julia interviews Samuel Quiko, who tells of the
peril his people faced after the war, being regarded as Brown Dutchmen.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Bersiap" date="04 October 1945" category="past"} Youth
gangs armed with deadly bamboo spears roam the streets, threatening
Europeans and any Indonesians deemed to be allied with the Dutch. Samuel
leads his neighbors in setting up nightly patrols of Kampung Tugu and
barricading entrances to the village.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Samuel Proves Patriotism" date="18 August 1988"
category="interview"} Samuel tells Julia that during the Bersiap period
he sought the protection of the local preman. To prove his loyalty to
the Republic, he offered to use his unique position of being able to
access both colonial and Republican worlds to act as a courier or even a
spy.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Krokodil Kourier" date="04 September 1947"
category="past"} Samuel and his band play at an art's exhibtion. He
takes a letter from Auke Sonnega to to give to Republican operatives. On
the way he and his friends are stopped by a Dutch patrol, but are
released after they give an impromptu concert of Dutch songs.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Julia Meets Regina" date="1 September 1988"
category="present"} Julia reads a review of an exhibition conducted in
Jakarta some years before by an amateur watercolorist named Regina
Artista Maya, who credits Emeria as a major influence. Julia contacts
the exhibition venue, acquires Regina's contact information, and
arranges a meeting.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Julia interviews Regina" date="5 September 1988"
category="interview"} Regina describes her experiences as a teenage
servant in the Emeria salon.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Artistic Inspiration" date="5 September 1988"
category="interview"} Regina tells Julia that Emeria inspired her to
practice art. A frequent guest, a youthful Dutch man, tutored her on
sketching. Regina does not remember his name, but suspects he may have
been a soldier, since he would always leave early in the evening, even
when food and drink was flowing freely.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Julia Pressures Victor" date="15 July 1988"
category="present"} Julia returns to confront Victor with her suspicion
that he and Emeria were lovers.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Victor Arrives" date="10 November 1946"
category="past"} Victor arrives in Batavia. He already knows some
Indonesia from studying a phrasebook during the voyage.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Victor Makes Maps" date="1 January 1947"
category="past"} Victor is assigned to the mapping department. The head
cartographer realizes Victor has a good eye for spotting details, and
recommends him as a photo analyst.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Victor Reviews Art" date="04 August 1947"
category="past"} Victor reviews art exhibitions for a Batavia newspaper

[SLUGLINE]{name="Victor Meets Emeria" date="04 October 1947"
category="past"} After Victor writes a lauditory review of Emeria's
exhibition, Auke Sonnega takes him to her studio.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Victor Assigned To Spoor" date="04 September 1947"
category="past"} Victor is surprised with he receives orders to work at
headquarters directly under General Spoor.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Ani Reminisces" date="30 September 1988"
category="interview"} As Cameron and Muharto fall deeper into their
conspiracy rabbit hole, Ani tells Julia of the hardships of life in
besieged Jogja.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Ani Serves Rice" date="15 July 1948" category="past"}
Ani helps to run a communal kitchen to feed the thousands of refugees
pouring into Jogjakarta.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Father Interrogates" date="07 April 1948"
category="past"} Ani's father questions Muharto about his career path.
He notes that as nominal co-pilot of RI-002 he is no more than an
airborne truck driver. If he wants to marry his daughter, he will need
to put himself on a fast promotion track by assuming managerial duties
at headquarters.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Father Gives Ultimatum" date="15 May 1948"
category="past"} Muharto visits the father of Ani to ask for her hand.
The father says he will give his blessing only if he accepts the
promotion and takes a desk assignment.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Cameron Terrorized" date="07 November 1988"
category="present"} Cameron receives a telephone call at his home. The
gruff voice on the other end suggests that Cameron stop poking into
matters that are not his own business.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Relationship Crisis" date="1 November 1988"
category="present"} Cameron voices suspicions to Syd that Julia is
leaking information about the investigation.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Santoso Necklace" date="15 August 1988"
category="present"} Muharto falls into trance while holding Santoso's
necklace. He sees Bambang in the captain's chair as RI-002 crashes.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Eddy Offers Tuition" date="4 December 1988"
category="present"} Julia confronts her father with the suspicion that
he was behind the PP harassment of Cameron.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Victor Meets Republicans" date="04 November 1947"
category="past"} Emeria takes Victor along (out of uniform) as she
sketches portraits of people crowded into the poorer sections of
Batavia. Many have been driven from their villages by neighbors who
support continued Dutch rule.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Bob Bought Suits" date="15 February 1948"
category="past"} Accepting that his ordered suits have been stolen in
transit, Bob purchases tailor-made suits in Manila.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Deportation Offer" date="04 February 1948"
category="past"} Salipada Penatun offers to have Bob Walters deported.
On the advice of Tom Lee, Bob declines the offer.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Bob Buys An Olds" date="04 February 1948"
category="past"} Bob finally receives his share from the sale of the
quinine. He sends a sizable amount to an automobile dealership in
Parsons to purchase an Oldsmobile for his parents.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Muharto Shops in Manila" date="15 February 1948"
category="past"} Muharto shops for clothes for his fellow officers.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Beer With Boedi" date="20 October 1988"
category="interview"} Cameron visits Boediardjo again to deliver the
self portrait.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Bob Walters Bitches" date="04 August 1947"
category="past"} Boedi has a beer with But another American aviator, Bob
Walters, Freeberg's co-owner of RI-002, who calls Bob a thief and a con
man.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Black Flights" date="04 March 1948" category="past"}
Suryadarma orders Bob to transport Republican opium to Bukittinggi. If
caught, Freeberg could be jailed for life as a narcotics smuggler.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Musical Chairs" date="15 March 1948" category="past"}
Muharto and Bambang argue over who gets to sit the the copilot seat.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Bambang Cannot Conceal Envy" date="15 April 1948"
category="past"} Moeljono pilots the newly purchased twin-engine RI-005
Avro-anson from Bukittinggi to Jogjakarta. Bambang is beside himself
with envy, and redoubles his efforts to claim the co-pilot seat of
RI-002.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Bob Was Graying" date="25 November 1988"
category="interview"} Muharto tells Cameron that by early 1948 he had
become worried about Bob as the demands of the missions took their toll.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Cobley Makes Deal" date="04 January 1948"
category="past"} Ralph Cobley, a semi-piratical British aviator,
arranges with the finance ministry to make blockade runs in his
amphibious Catalina registered as RI-005.

[SLUGLINE]{name="POAS Flights" date="04 March 1948" category="past"}
Muhammad Hatta invites John Coast to to begin regular services to Jogja.
Coast and investors in Bangkok form Pacific Overseas Air Charter, or
POAS, and hire American Dave Fowler as head pilot.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Savage Loses confidence" date="04 April 1948"
category="past"} Hugh Savage tells Bob that he is concerned that the Bob
Walter's fiasco has warned off potential customers and investors of SE
Airways.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Major Criminal" date="15 April 1948" category="past"}
Spoor learns that RI-002 is flying the Republican stockpile of opium to
Bukittinggi. He decides to brand Freeberg as a narcotic smuggler, which
would allow his fighters to use deadly force if they encounter RI-002.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Smuggled Gems" date="15 April 1948" category="past"}
Freeberg is furious to discover that Muharto has smuggled gems on RI-002
to trade for handguns.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Bambang Takes His Seat" date="07 May 1948"
category="past"} Bambang finally gets his permanent assignment as RI-002
co-pilot when Muharto is promoted and reassigned to headquarters.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Not Ready For Airplanes" date="07 May 1948"
category="past"} Freeberg is furious when Bambang shows up too late for
an opium run, forcing him to cancel the mission, saying that Indonesian
are not ready for airplanes.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Julia Reads About Robert Koke" date="5 October 1988"
category="present"} Julia finds a book written by Robert Koke's wife.
The depiction of Koke as a supporter of Indonesian independence
contradicts the image of a CIA coup-monger.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Master of Dissemination" date="6 October 1988"
category="present"} Julia insists that Robert Koke supported
independence, but Cameron is equally adamant that this was only CIA
dissemination.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Captain Jack" date="07 December 1988"
category="interview"} Captain Jack, who flew with Dave Fowler after
independence, repeats to Cameron Fowler's stories of blockade running.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Landing Gear Collapse" date="04 May 1948"
category="past"} RI-002 cracks a wing when the landing gear collapses
prior to takeoff.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Fighter Planes Tail Fowler" date="10 September 1948"
category="past"} During a night flight, Fowler believes he spots Dutch
fighters flanking him.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Spite Their Face" date="21 September 1948"
category="past"} Over whiskey with Muhartoat Hotel Merdeka Freeberg and
Fowler complain about Suryadarma cutting off his fuel allowance because
they act like commercial aviation pilots, not serving Air Force
officers.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Fowler Refuses Request" date="29 September 1948"
category="past"} Suryadarma orders Fowler to transport a quarter ton of
gold to Bukittinggi. Fowler refuses the commission as being too risky.
Suryadarma has no choice but to turn to Bob Freeberg.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Spoor Calls Off Patrol" date="10 September 1948"
category="past"} Spoor orders a night patrol not to engage a blockade
running POAS flight because he is informed that civilians are
passengers.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Julia Learns of CIA Airforce" date="21 November 1988"
category="present"} Julia discovers that Muharto's had commanded the CIA
Air Force during the Permesta rebellion.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Cameron Grows Doubtful" date="22 November 1988"
category="present"} Julia confronts Cameron with the evidence that
Muharto was the point man for the CIA air force. Cameron insists that
Julia has misinterpreted the article.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Im The Captain" date="15 June 1948" category="past"}
During the Soekarno tour, Bob refuses Soekarno's order to land on unsafe
airfield. Soekarno is annoyed, but then commends Bob for standing up to
him.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Bambang Ingratiates Himself" date="15 June 1948"
category="past"} Bambang ingratiates himself with Soekarno in the hope
of being selected to fly RI-001. Boedi finds his efforts, and Soekarno's
condescending replies, amusing.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Our American Friend" date="21 June 1948"
category="past"} Soekarno proclaims Freeberg to be "Our American Friend"
during a speech delivered from the wing of RI-002.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Bob Defies Suryadarma" date="01 July 1948"
category="past"} On his return to Jogja, Suryadarma orders Bob to
Sumatra on another mission. Bob refuses, and infuriates Suryadarma by
flying to Manila that day.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Arts Reporter" date="25 November 1988"
category="research"} Julia finds a decade-old magazine article profiling
Jan Boon as a pioneering journalist who elected to take Indonesian
citizenship. The magazine editor confirms that Jan Boon is still living
in Jakarta, and gives Julia his contact info.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Senior Journalist" date="1 December 1988"
category="research"} Julia discovers Jan Boon is still alive and
arranges an interview

[SLUGLINE]{name="Cobley Flies Cadres" date="15 June 1948"
category="past"} In mid June 1948, Cobley repatriates communist cadres
exiled during the colonial era. He secretly transports them to isolated
Campurdarat lake in eastern Java where they continue to Madiun.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Bob Returns" date="15 August 1948" category="past"} Bob
flies RI-002 from Manila to Jogja. Both the pilot and aircraft have are
in top condition, and Bob looks forward to getting back to work.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Suryadarma Cuts Off Fowler" date="04 September 1948"
category="past"} Suryadarma takes away Fowler's fuel allowance. Fowler
resolves the issue by going over Suryadarma's head and complaining
directly to Muhammad Hatta.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Reconciling With Freeberg" date="21 August 1948"
category="past"} Freeberg invites Boedi to share a bottle of whiskey he
brought from Manila. Boedi shows up with Muharto, and charms Freeberg
into speaking with his former co-pilot and reconciling their
differences.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Cameron Interviews Paul Verspoor"
date="04 November 1988" category="interview"} Cameron meets Paul
Verspoor, a retired Dutch airforce officer who seems to know more that
he lets on about the fate of RI-002.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Verspoor Confesses" date="15 December 1988"
category="interview"} Verspoor confesses the Westerling had asked if his
squadron would support a military coup.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Ruby Anniversary" date="24 October 1988"
category="present"} Julia and Cameron attend the 40th wedding
anniversary of Ani and Petit Muharto.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Muharto Marries Ani" date="24 October 1948"
category="past"} Ani and Muharto marry. The day is marked by equal
measures of joy and sadness, as the absence of Bob Freeberg weighs heavy
on Muharto's heart.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Ani Berates Westerling" date="27 December 1948"
category="past"} Stopped by a Dutch patrol Ani summons all the imperious
passion of a high-born Javanese women to give the commanding officer a
vicious tongue lashing, diverting attention while Muharto swallows his
Air Force identification.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Robert Koke Replies" date="07 December 1988"
category="research"} Robert Koke replies with accounts of his adventures
as a CIA officer in Batavia.

[SLUGLINE]{name="RI-002 Drops Leaflets" date="28 September 1948"
category="past"} RI-002 drops propaganda leaflets over communist-held
Madiun.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Julia Goes Ballistic" date="21 November 1988"
category="present"} Julia is driven to fury while overhearing the open
racism of Dutch expats during a party in Kemang.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Victor In Jogja" date="27 December 1948"
category="past"} Spoor sends Victor to Jogja to document what he expects
to be a warm welcome as liberators. Instead, Victor witnesses Ani
dressing down a squad commander.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Victor Joins Republicans" date="28 December 1948"
category="past"} Victor defects to Republicans after being told Emeria
is waiting for him in the hills.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Spoor Warns Victor" date="07 December 1948"
category="past"} Spoor warns Victor about fraternizing with Emeria and
the Republican artists. Spoor threatens to reassign Victor to a combat
unit.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Quikio Confesses" date="4 December 1988"
category="interview"} Samuel Quiko confesses to passing along RI-002
final flight plan to Auke Sonnega.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Trusted Companion" date="1 December 1988"
category="interview"} Hermann Bennick tells Julia of Spoor's suspicion
that KNIL officers were running guns.

[SLUGLINE]{name="PP Threaten Cameron" date="07 December 1988"
category="present"} Leaving the Earthquake, Cameron is waylaid by Pemuda
Pancasila thugs. Sanyoto appears, and whacks the leader on the nose with
his cane.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Cameron Meets Yapto" date="07 December 1988"
category="present"} Sanyoto for Cameron to meet Yapto, the head of the
Pemuda Pancasila, who apologises for the misunderstanding with his boys
and gives him a signed business card to show Cameron is now under his
protection.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Julia Finds RI-002 Photo" date="15 December 1988"
category="present"} Julia finds a photo in a misfiled volume of BN. The
image shows a Dakota with 002 painted on the nose guarded by a KNIL
soldier.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Julia Finds Emeria" date="07 December 1988"
category="present"} Julia tracks down Emiria teaching art to children in
a village on the outskirts of Jogja. Emeria says she regrets using
Victor, but it was wartime.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Victor Learns Truth" date="07 December 1988"
category="present"} Julia tells meets Victor to tell him about her
encounter with Emeria.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Syd Fills In" date="13 December 1988"
category="present"} Cameron asks Syd to fill in for him. But an
additional work load taxes even this old pro.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Anwar Congo" date="04 December 1988"
category="interview"} Anwar reveals that KNIL officers had paid him to
smuggle a substantial quantity of gold to Singapore.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Syd Dies" date="17 December 1988" category="present"}
Cameron returns from Karangendah on the morning flight and goes directly
to Syd's room to tell him the news. He finds his friend dead in his
favorite reading chair, a book on his lap and a glass of whiskey at his
side.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Julia Choice" date="16 December 1988"
category="present"} Julia turns down Cameron's offer and announces her
decision to take her masters at UI.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Gold Run" date="30 September 1948" category="past"}
Suryadarma reluctantly assigns Bob Freeberg the mission to transport
gold to Bukittinggi.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Tom Lee In Jogja" date="25 September 1988"
category="past"} Tom Lee accompanies the last RI-002 flight to Jogja to
study veterans claims. Tom and Bob apply for a license to shoot a
documentary film.

[SLUGLINE]{name="SE Air Bankrupt" date="29 September 1948"
category="past"} Hugh Savage tells Bob that Southeast Airlines has
failed, their one aircraft has been repossessed, and he has lost his
investment.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Loading The Gold" date="30 September 1948"
category="past"} Muharto visits Bob as he is preparing RI-002 for the
flight to Gorda. He reminds Bob that his wedding is scheduled for three
weeks away.

[SLUGLINE]{name="Last Flight of RI-002" date="05 October 1948"
category="past"} Bambang takes control and flies back to Branti. When
they reach the mountain range on the border with Republican controlled
Lampung, the escorting fighters attack. Bambang dives into valleys,
recreating what Bob did the previous week.
