**In June 1947 **Bob Freeberg lands his unmarked Dakota cargo plane on
remote Cilotok beach in southwest Java, the huge aircraft shuddering to
a stop a few meters from a cliff at one end. Villagers appear, marveling
at this colossus from the sky. They are friendly and offer Bob and his
two Filipino crew members food and a place to sleep. But the following
morning, Indonesian soldiers appear. One points to the lack of
registration on the Dakotas tail and shouts "*Mata-Mata*!", "Spy!" They
point their rifles directly at Bob. He replies with the only words they
might understand, a name: "Captain Petit Muharto"

**In September 1988 **Cameron Bishop, an American journalism student
interning at The Jakarta Post as a copy editor, sits with retired Air
Force Major Petit Muharto at his home in Jakarta. Muharto had asked his
old friend Sabam Siagian, the English-language newspaper's managing
editor, to publish a story commemorating Bob Freeberg on the 40th
anniversary of his mysterious disappearance on 1 October 1948. Muharto
begins his narrative by telling Cameron of a message he received one
morning at his desk in Maguwo air base in Jogjakarta.

Muharto is surprised to be given a message from an army lieutenant
stationed in Tasikmalaya informing him that a foreign pilot had landed
an unmarked cargo aircraft on a nearby beach and, astoundingly, had
asked for Muharto by name. Muharto takes this information to his
commander, Suryadarma, who tells him to fly to Tasik and find out which
of Muharto's "foreign flyboy friends" it is.

Muharto leads a blockade run with Bob Freeberg, then a contract pilot
for a Manila-based charter airline, as captain. Amid poor visibility
over Java, Bob demonstrates his piloting skill by diving through a break
in the clouds, leveling off under the cloud cover a few hundred meters
above the ground. Muharto spots a railway line, and tells Bob that it
leads along the valley to terminate in Jogja. Bob follows the line,
barely visible through the rain, and jokingly asks Muharto if there are
any tunnels between here the Jogja. The look on Muharto's face suggests
that he is not entirely sure.

**In June 1947 **Arriving at Cilotok, Muharto and Pang marvel that
Freeberg had been able to land on this short stretch of beach, bookended
by high bluffs. Muharto recognizes Freeberg and they greet as friends.
Fearing that a patrolling Dutch fighter could appear at any time,
Muharto, in a stirring speech, implores the assembled villagers to tear
apart their houses to fashion an improvised runway from the bamboo mats
used as walls. They do so, and with Muharto and Pang on board, the
Dakota takes off and flies to Maguwo.

In Maguwo Suryadarma commissions Bob to fly a cargo of high-value
quinine to Manila and return with essential medicines and spare parts.
Muharto expresses concern about the reception that might await unmarked
aircraft carrying high-value goods into Manila. He suggests that they
paint a fictitious registration number onto the tail. Muharto suggests
RI-002. Bob says it should be RI-001, as his is the first aircraft.
Suryadarma, imperiously, states that "RI-001" is reserved for a future
presidential aircraft. Bob grumbles as Suryadarma issues the order to
paint the number on the Dakota's tail.

**In September 1947 **RI-002 returns to Java. Because the presence of
Captain Espina must remain secret, RI-002 cannot refuel in
British-controlled Labuan. They are dangerously low on fuel as they
reach Java. In the gathering darkness, Muharto has difficulty
identifying landmarks. Tension mounts in the cabin as the fuel gauges
slide toward empty. Bob admonishes Muharto saying: "This is your
country, you should now where we are!" Muharto draws on the vivid
schoolboy memory of his classmates giggling as they describe a range of
low, rounded hills near Jogja as female breasts. He soon spots the
distinctive geographic feature and, now oriented, guides Bob to a safe
landing in Jogja.

Muharto takes Bob for an afternoon walk to show him the town. Bob is
impressed at the resilience of the people as they struggle with the
privation caused by the Dutch blockade. They visit the palace of the
former Dutch governor, now repurposed as the seat of the Indonesian
Republic. As Bob admires the architecture, he is astounded to suddenly
be ushered into the office of President Soekarno. As is his custom in
private conversation, Soekarno treats Bob as an equal and puts him at
ease, imploring the American to help his people in their struggle for
freedom.

In the co-pilot seat, Muharto spots an small airplane near the horizon
as they fly near Dutch territory. This is most likely a Dutch fighter on
patrol, so Bob steers RI-002 into a tropical storm. Boedi grins when he
sees Muharto's terrified face as the Dakota is violently buffeted, with
sickening plunges in altitude. Bob tells Muharto to not worry; when a
Navy test pilot he would fly through typhoons.

Bob flies a team of Republican officials and technocrats from Maguwo to
a United Nation's conference in the Philippines to make the case for
Indonesian independence. These highly educated, cosmopolitan men treat
Bob with the same great respect as do the common people of Jogja.

**In May 1948 **Suryadarma gives Muharto the good news that he is being
promoted to major and reassigned. The bad news, at least according to
Muharto, is that his new position is administrative and he will be
piloting a desk.

**In October 1948 **Muharto tells Cameron that on the afternoon of 1
October 1948 he heard reports that RI-002 had not arrived at
Bukittinggi. In the following days, the Dutch denied any knowledge of
the disappearance, and the Republic was unable to mount more than a
cursory search. Muharto shows Cameron a clipping dated 1983 about rattan
gatherers finding wreckage on a remote mountain in South Sumatra.
Muharto said that he used his AURI credentials to research the archives
for the investigation report. He found, to his astonishment, that the
wreckage had actually been discovered in April 1977.

**In April 1977 **Two wiry men dressed in shabby clothes lead a squad of
airmen and their officer, Lt. Sulaiman, through a forested hillside to
the wreckage of RI-002. The airmen set up camp and search the area. They
find fragments of a wing with the faded letters: RI-00, other airplane
parts, including a dynamo with a bullet wedged between the windings and
armature. There are a few fragments of human remains, which the soldiers
reverently dig from the earth and carefully wrap in cloth. They also
find two empty wooden crates labeled: "Gold", but a thorough search of
the area does not find any trace of the treasure itself.

**In July 1977 **Five coffins draped in Indonesian flags lie on a
platform in an otherwise empty hanger. A sixth coffin, larger than the
rest and without a flag, rests on a separate platform. A flatbed truck
pulls into the hanger and a squad of airmen, in silence, pick up each of
the flag-draped coffins and place them on the truck. But they leave the
sixth coffin where it lies as the truck pulls away.

Muharto tells Cameron that the sixth coffin, presumably containing Bob's
remains, could not be buried with the others in the National Hero
cemetary because he was a foreigner. Muharto's expression as he finishes
his reminiscences convinces Cameron that he had regarded Freeberg as a
close friend, and is seeking closure about his mysterious disappearance.
As Cameron rises to leave, Muharto wonders that if he had turned down
promotion and had been with Bob on the final flight, maybe it would not
have ended in tragedy.

Cameron writes up the interview, and gives it to managing editor Sabam
Siagian, who had given him the assignment. Sabam glances at the copy,
grunts, then passes the pages to Syd Jardine, the senior copy editor.
Syd reads it, then remarks that Freeberg comes off as a "super-pilot"
and not entirely credible. He suggests Cameron find other accounts of
Bob by researching in the reference section of the newly opened National
Library.

Cameron uses his Jakarta Post credentials to gain access to the
reference section of the National Library. Julia Suryakusuma, an
attractive, bookish woman in her early 20s, is the only staffer speaking
fluent English, and so is assigned to assist him, as visitors are not
allowed into the stacks. Cameron explains his mission, and Julia
disappears into the stacks, returning shortly with a few books written
by foreigners about the period. Skimming through the material, Cameron's
attention is drawn to a passage in a book by British diplomat John Coast
relating events at a gathering of foreign aviators in the mountain town
of Bukittinggi, a Republican base of operations.

In the ballroom of what used to be the Dutch governor's palace, Richard
Cobley, a semi-piratical British aviator, drunkenly accuses Bob of
taking the best contracts by scaring off others by exaggerating the
danger. Petit Muharto stands and defends his colleague, saying that, if
anything, Bob plays down the danger. Later, while Bob stumbles along an
unlit path to his lodgings, Cobley confronts him, warning that an
"accident" might happen to his ramshackle Dakota unless he shares the
wealth.

In the ballroom of the former Dutch governor's palace in Bukittinggi,
Richard Cobley drunkenly accuses Bob of taking the best blockade-running
contracts through his close relationship with the Indonesian government.
Later, while Bob stumbles along an unlit path to his lodgings, Cobley
confronts him, warning that an "accident" might happen to his ramshackle
Dakota unless he shares the wealth.
