[Slugline]{date="7 June 1947" sequence_start="true"
location="Cilotok"}Bob Freeberg lands his unmarked Dakota cargo plane on
a remote beach in southwest Java, the huge aircraft shuddering to a stop
a few meters from a cliff at one end. Villagers appear, marveling at
this colossus from the sky. They are friendly and offer Bob and his two
Filipino crew members food and a place to sleep. But the following
morning, Indonesian soldiers appear. One points to the lack of
registration on the Dakotas tail and shouts "*Mata-Mata*!", "Spy!" They
point their rifles directly at Bob. He replies with the only words they
might understand, a name: "Captain Petit Muharto"

[Slugline]{sequence_start="true" location="Muharto Residence"
date="25 September 1988"}Cameron Bishop, an American journalism student
interning at the Jakarta Post, calls on retired Air Force Major Petit
Muharto to interview him about his experiences flying blockade runs with
Bob Freeberg in his war-surplus Dakota registered to the new Republic of
Indonesia as RI-002. Muharto begins with the surprising message he
received at his desk at Maguwo air base in Jogjakarta.

[Slugline]{sequence_start="false" date="8 June 1947"
location="Maguwo"}Muharto receives a message flown by airborne military
courier from Pang Soeparto, an army lieutenant stationed in Tasikmalaya.
The message contains the news that a foreign pilot had landed an
unmarked cargo aircraft on a nearby beach and, astoundingly, had asked
for Muharto by name. Muharto takes this information to his commander,
Suryadarma, who agrees that the matter is worth investigation.

[Slugline]{location="Over Java" sequence_start="false"
date="8 june 1947"}Muharto flies to Tasikmalaya in an open-cockpit
Japanese monoplane. During the flight, he wonders which of the
blockade-running pilots he might be, The first two had been routine
commercial runs, with even a flight attendent. His thoughts drift to the
last, and most eventful blockade run two months before. This aircraft, a
Nikosoren, was one of a score barely servicable planes the Japanese had
left behind. The air force mechanics kept these aircraft flying through
skill and guesswork, but Muharto was aware that any flight could end in
disaster. To keep his mind from this eventuality, Muharto thought about
the American pilots he had met during the blockade runs he had organized
from Singapore to Jogjakarta. He decided that only Bob Freeberg
possessed the skill and nerve to land at night on a remote beach. Bob
had been the pilot of the third blockade run. Though these had been
standard charter flights -- they even had a flight attendant, a lovely
Filipina named Miss Brown -- the third flight would test the skills of
any aviator.

[Slugline]{sequence_start="false" location="Muharto Residence"
date="25 September 1988"}Muharto tells Cameron that he thought back

[Slugline]{location="CALI Dakota" sequence_start="false"
date="31 March 1947"}Muharto leads a blockade run with Bob Freeberg,
then a contract pilot for a Manila-based charter airline, as captain.
Amid poor visibility over Java, Bob demonstrates his piloting skill by
diving through a break in the clouds, leveling off under the cloud cover
a few hundred meters above the ground. Muharto spots a railway line, and
tells Bob that it leads along the valley to terminate in Jogja. Bob
follows the line, barely visible through the rain, while Muharto
desperately tries to remember if there is a tunnel between their current
location and Jogjakarta.

[Slugline]{sequence_start="false" date="31 March 1947"
location="Maguwo"}Suryadarma tells Muharto that this will be his last
blockade run. An Indian businessman has offered to link India with the
Republic with his own Dakota, registered as VT-CLA. He has the full
support of the Indian government, so further chartered runs will not be
necessary. Muharto is disappointed, but this will be memorable, as
Suryadarma asks Bob to make a couple of detours on the way back to
Singapore. Bob cheerfully agrees.

[Slugline]{date="31 March 1947" location="Karangendah"
sequence_start="false"}Engines roaring with reversed props, Bob makes a
spectacular landing on a refurbished Japanese airstrip at Karangendah on
the grasslands of south Sumatra. Santoso, the base commander climbs
aboard to meet them. After a short conversation, Santoso exits, and Bob
takes off, the wheels finally lifting off the runway a few meters before
the end.

[Slugline]{location="Cilotok" sequence_start="false"
date="8 June 1947"}Muharto and Pang marvel that the pilot had been able
to land on this short stretch of beach, bookended by high bluffs.
Muharto recognizes Freeberg and they greet as friends. Fearing that a
patrolling Dutch fighter could appear at any time, Muharto, in a
stirring speech, implores the assembled villagers to tear apart their
houses to fashion an improvised runway from the bamboo mats used as
walls. They do so, and with Muharto and Pang on board, the Dakota takes
off and flies to Maguwo.

[Slugline]{sequence_start="false" location="Maguwo"
date="8 June 1947"}Suryadarma commissions Bob to fly a cargo of
high-value quinine to Manila and return with essential medicines and
spare parts. Muharto expresses concern about the reception that might
await unmarked aircraft carrying high-value goods into Manila. He
suggests that they paint a fictitious registration number onto the tail.
After some debate, Muharto, Bob, and Suryadarma agree on "RI-002",
reserving "RI-001" for a future presidential aircraft.

[Slugline]{sequence_start="false" date="25 September 1988"
location="Muharto Residence"}Muharto tells Cameron that he flew with
RI-002 until May 1948, when he was promoted to major and posted to
headquarters. Muharto saw little of Bob after that, but was looking for
forward to having Bob as guest of honor at this wedding in October.

[Slugline]{date="30 September 1948" location="Maguwo"
sequence_start="false"}Muharto sees Bob off on the runway. Bob tells
Muharto that he will be in Singapore and Manila for a couple of weeks,
but promises to return to Jogja with his own fiancee in time to attend
Muharto's wedding.

[Slugline]{location="Muharto Residence" date="25 September 1988"
sequence_start="false"}But on 1 October, Muharto heard reports that
RI-002 had been lost while transporting a large cargo of gold to
Bukittinggi. The Dutch denied any knowledge of the disappearance, and
the Republic was unable to mount more than a cursory search. Two farmers
stumbled upon wreckage on a remote mountaintop in 1977, and the Air
Force investigated the site. Muharto, long retired, only heard of this
some years later. But as a former officer, he as permitted to access Air
Force archives, where he found the investigation report and . Muharto
shows Cameron a clipping dated 1983 about ratten gatherers finding
wreckage on a remote mountain in South Sumatra. Muharto uses his AURI
credentials to research the archives

[Slugline]{date="25 April 1977" sequence_start="false"
location="Mount Punggur"}Two wiry men dressed in shabby clothes lead a
squad of airmen and their officer, Lt. Sulaiman, through a forested
hillside to the wreckage of RI-002. The airmen set up camp and search
the area. They find fragments of a wing with the faded letters: RI-00,
other airplane parts, including a dynamo with a bullet wedged between
the windings and armature. There are a few fragments of human remains,
which the soldiers reverently dig from the earth and carefully wrap in
cloth. They also find two empty wooden crates labeled: "Gold", but a
thorough search of the area does not find any trace of the treasure
itself.

[Slugline]{sequence_start="false" date="20 July 1977"
location="Tanjung Karang"}In an otherwise empty hanger, five coffins
draped in Indonesian flags lay on a platform. A sixth coffin, larger
than the rest and without a flag, rests on a separate platform. A
flatbed truck pulls into the hanger and a squad of airmen, in silence,
pick up each of the coffins and place them on the truck. But they leave
the sixth coffin where it lies as the truck pulls away.

[Slugline]{location="Muharto Residence" sequence_start="false"
date="25 September 1988"}Muharto tells Cameron that the sixth coffin,
presumably containing Bobs remains, could not be buried with the others
because he was a foreigner. Muhartos expression as he finishes his
reminiscences convinces Cameron that he regarded Freeberg as a close
friend, and is seeking closure about his mysterious disappearance. As
Cameron rises to leave, Muharto wonders that if he had turned down
promotion and had been with Bob on the final flight, maybe it would not
have ended in tragedy.

[Slugline]{sequence_start="true" location="Jakarta Post"
date="26 September 1988"}Cameron writes up the interview, and gives it
to managing editor Sabam Siagian, who had given him the assignment.
Sabam glances at the copy, grunts, then passes the pages to Syd Jardine,
the senior copy editor. Syd reads it carefully, then remarks that
Freeberg comes off as a "super-pilot" and not believable. He suggests
Cameron find other accounts of Bob by researching in the reference
section of the newly opened National Library.

[Slugline]{sequence_start="false" date="27 September 1988"
location="National Library"}Cameron uses his Jakarta Post credentials to
enter the reference section. Julia Suryakusuma, the only staffer
speaking fluent English, is assigned to fetch the material he needs from
the stacks. Julia returns with an armload of books, and Cameron begins
reading. Skimming through the supplementary background material Julia
selected, Cameron's attention is drawn to a passage in a book by British
diplomat John Coast about meeting Bob in Bukittinggi.

[Slugline]{sequence_start="false" date="May 1948"
location="Bukittinggi"}John Coast and Dave Fowler watch as the starboard
landing gear on RI-002 slowly collapses from hydraulic system failure.
Bob emerges from the cockpit and admits that the craft is suffering from
the wear-and-tear of past months, especially repeated landings on rough
jungle airstrips. But he is waiting for the Indonesians to pay him the
huge debt they owe so he can do the much-needed repairs. Coast tells Bob
that he is welcome to fly for his company, POAS, if RI-002 becomes too
dangerous. Bob thanks him, but insists that he will find a way to fix
his beloved Dakota.

[Slugline]{sequence_start="false" location="National Library"
date="28 September 1988"}After hours of research, Cameron asks Julia
where he can get a cup of coffee. Julia invites him to join her at the
library canteen. Julia tells Cameron of her dream of securing a
scholarship to pursue post-graduate studies in America. Cameron
attempts, in turn, to tell of his dreams of becoming an international
investigative journalist. But Julia stops him, saying, with a
mischievious smile, that if she wants to know anything about him she
will simply ask her father, who is a senior officer in military
intelligence.

[Slugline]{location="Jakarta Post" date="3 October 1988"
sequence_start="true"}Muharto visits to personally thank Sabam and
Cameron for the article, and to tell them that he has been bombarded
with calls from old friends asking about what happened to the gold. Syd
Jardine says that since unloading a quarter ton of gold would require
considerable resources, discovering who might have had the motivation
and ability to transport and sell the gold could solve the mystery of
RI-002. Muharto agrees, and Cameron eagerly offers to help. Sabam gives
his grudging assent, but reminds Cameron that the Jakarta Post cannot be
involved, and he must to any research on his own time.
