On the evening of & June 1947 Bob Freeberg lands his unmarked Dakota
cargo plane on remote Cilotok beach in southwest Java, the huge aircraft
shuddering to a stop a few meters from a cliff at one end. Villagers
appear, marveling at this colossus from the sky. They are friendly and
offer Bob and his two Filipino crew members food and a place to sleep.
But the following morning, Indonesian soldiers appear. One points to the
lack of registration on the Dakotas tail and shouts "*Mata-Mata*!",
"Spy!" They point their rifles directly at Bob. He replies with the only
words they might understand, a name: "Captain Petit Muharto"

In  September 1988, Cameron Bishop, an American journalism student interning at The Jakarta
Post as a copy editor, interviews retired Air Force Major Petit Muharto,
an old friend of his editor, Sabam Siagian, about his experiences flying
blockade runs with Bob Freeberg. Muharto begins with the surprising
message he received at his desk at Maguwo air base in Jogjakarta.

On 8 June 1947, Muharto receives a message from Pang Soeparto, an army
lieutenant stationed in Tasikmalaya informing him that a foreign pilot
had landed an unmarked cargo aircraft on a nearby beach and,
astoundingly, had asked for Muharto by name. Muharto takes this
information to his commander, Suryadarma, who tells him to fly to Tasik
and find out which of Muharto's "foreign flyboy friends" it is.

Muharto tells Cameron that he flew to Tasikmalaya on a Nikosoren, was
one of a score barely servicable planes the Japanese had left behind.
The air force mechanics kept these aircraft flying through skill and
guesswork, but Muharto was aware that any flight could end in disaster.
To keep his mind from this eventuality, Muharto thought about the
American pilots he had met during the blockade runs he had organized
from Singapore to Jogjakarta. He decided that only Bob Freeberg
possessed the skill and nerve to land at night on a remote beach. Bob
had been the pilot of the third blockade run. Though these had been
standard charter flights -- they even had a flight attendant, a lovely
Filipina named Miss Brown -- the third flight would test the skills of
any aviator.

Muharto leads a blockade run with Bob Freeberg, then a contract pilot
for a Manila-based charter airline, as captain. Amid poor visibility
over Java, Bob demonstrates his piloting skill by diving through a break
in the clouds, leveling off under the cloud cover a few hundred meters
above the ground. Muharto spots a railway line, and tells Bob that it
leads along the valley to terminate in Jogja. Bob follows the line,
barely visible through the rain, and jokingly asks Muharto if there are
any tunnels between here the Jogja. The look on Muharto's face suggests
that he is not entirely sure.

Muharto tells Cameron that at Tasikmalaya, Pang Suparto confirmed that
it was indeed Bob Freeberg stuck on the beach. They loaded two barrels
of aviation fuel into a jeep and drove to the coast.

## Muharto and Pang marvel that Freeberg had been able to land on this short stretch of beach, bookended by high bluffs. Muharto recognizes Freeberg and they greet as friends. Fearing that a patrolling Dutch fighter could appear at any time, Muharto, in a stirring speech, implores the assembled villagers to tear apart their houses to fashion an improvised runway from the bamboo mats used as walls. They do so, and with Muharto and Pang on board, the Dakota takes off and flies to Maguwo.

title: Birth Of RI-002 date: 8 June 1947 location: Maguwo status:
synopsis ---

Suryadarma commissions Bob to fly a cargo of high-value quinine to
Manila and return with essential medicines and spare parts. Muharto
expresses concern about the reception that might await unmarked aircraft
carrying high-value goods into Manila. He suggests that they paint a
fictitious registration number onto the tail. Muharto suggests RI-002.
Bob says it should be RI-001, as his is the first aircraft. Suryadarma,
imperiously, states that "RI-001" is reserved for a future presidential
aircraft. Bob grumbles as Suryadarma issues the order to paint the
number on the Dakota's tail.

Muharto tells Cameron that they landed in Manila without incident.
However, the Dutch diplomats there claimed the quinine cargo as Dutch
property, and took them to court.

Bob and Muharto are challenging the Dutch claim over the quinine cargo.
Their lawyer, Salipada Penatun, who is also a sitting senator with
extensive high-level contacts, lays out the legal justification for
ownership of the quinine, then lets Muharto give an impassioned plea,
claiming that the money from selling the quinine will buy medicines and
other essentials unavailable in the besieged capital. The Dutch counter
by calling a plantation expert to testify that the Republic does not
have the capability to process quinine, so the drug must have been
produced in a Dutch-owed factory before the war. Muharto jumps to his
feet, ready to protest this insult to his people's technological skill,
but Penatun motions for him to sit down, then calmly tells the judge: "A
foreigner is not qualified to discuss the internal matters of the
sovereign Republic of Indonesia." The judge considers this with some
sympathy, declines to allow the expert witness, and adjourns the
session. --- title: Waiting For Funds date: 25 September 1988 location:
Muharto Residence category: interview status: synopsis ---

Muharto tells Cameron that he, Boedi and Pang were penniless as they
waited for the verdict to be handed down. Bob found them baci
accommodation in a boarding house, and bought them a single meal each
day at the cheapest eatery in Manila: The Madras Curry Restaurant.

Muharto protests as Bob again picks up the bill for their bowls of
curry. But Bob insists that as captain of RI-002 he is responsible for
their well-being until he returns them safely to Java.

Bob invites Muharto, Pang, and Boedi to his apartment to celebrate that
morning's verdict awarding the quinine to them. Bob's housemate has a
military-grade short-wave radio, which Boedi immediately switches on and
scans the military and civilian frequencies. The party mood vanishes
when a news broadcast announces that an Indian blockade runner had been
shot down on approach to Maguwo. All look toward Bob, and he nods in
acknowledgement that RI-002 might be the last remaining hope to connect
the Republic with the rest of the world.

Muharto tells Cameron that they finally managed to sell the quinine in
September and return to Java. For security reasons RI-002 had to make
the trip non-stop, which left them dangerously low on fuel as they
reached Java.

In the gathering darkness, Muharto has difficulty identifying landmarks.
Tension mounts in the cabin as the fuels gauges slide toward empty. Bob
admonishes Muharto saying: "This is your country, you should now where
we are!" Muharto draws on the vivid schoolboy memory of his classmates
giggling as they describe a range of low, rounded hills near Jogja as
female breasts. He soon spots the distinctive geographic feature and,
now oriented, guides Bob to a safe landing in Jogja.

Muharto takes Bob for an afternoon walk to introduce him to Jogja, and
they visit the palace of the former Dutch governor, now repurposed as
the seat of the Indonesian Republic. As Bob admires the architecture, he
is astounded to suddenly be ushered into the office of President
Soekarno. As is his custom in private conversation, Soekarno treats Bob
as an equal and puts him at ease, imploring the American to help his
people in their struggle for freedom.

Muharto tells Cameron that Bob became an invaluable link between the
besieged republic and the outside world, flying high-value agricultural
products to Singapore and Manila, and returning with medicine and spare
parts for vehicles, generators, and the like. Though essential, the
missions were hardly exciting or glamorous, though there were moments.

Muharto spots an small airplane near the horizon as they fly near Dutch
territory. This is most likely a Dutch fighter on patrol, so Bob steers
RI-002 into a violent tropical storm. Boedi grins when he sees Muharto's
terrified face as the Dakota is violently buffeted, with sickening
plunges in altitude. Bob tells Muharto to not worry; when a Navy test
pilot he would fly through typhoons.

Bob flies a team of Republican officials and technocrats to a United
Nation's conference in the Philippines, where they successfully made the
case for Indonesian independence. These highly educated, cosmopolitan
men treat Bob with the same great respect as do the common people of
Jogja.

Muharto tells Cameron that he flew with RI-002 until May 1948, when he
was promoted to major and posted to headquarters. Muharto saw little of
Bob after that, but was looking for forward to having Bob as guest of
honor at this wedding in October.

Muharto sees Bob off on the runway. Bob tells Muharto that he will be in
Singapore and Manila for a couple of weeks, but promises to return to
Jogja with his own fiancee in time to attend Muharto's wedding.

Muharto tells Cameron that on the afternoon of 1 October he heard
reports that RI-002 had not arrived at Bukittinggi. In the following
days, the Dutch denied any knowledge of the disappearance, and the
Republic was unable to mount more than a cursory search. Muharto shows
Cameron a clipping dated 1983 about ratten gatherers finding wreckage on
a remote mountain in South Sumatra. Muharto said that he used his AURI
credentials to research the archives for the investigation report. He
found, to his astonishment, that the wreckage had actually been
discovered in April 1977.

Two wiry men dressed in shabby clothes lead a squad of airmen and their
officer, Lt. Sulaiman, through a forested hillside to the wreckage of
RI-002. The airmen set up camp and search the area. They find fragments
of a wing with the faded letters: RI-00, other airplane parts, including
a dynamo with a bullet wedged between the windings and armature. There
are a few fragments of human remains, which the soldiers reverently dig
from the earth and carefully wrap in cloth. They also find two empty
wooden crates labeled: "Gold", but a thorough search of the area does
not find any trace of the treasure itself.

Five coffins draped in Indonesian flags lay on a platform in an
otherwise empty hanger. A sixth coffin, larger than the rest and without
a flag, rests on a separate platform. A flatbed truck pulls into the
hanger and a squad of airmen, in silence, pick up each of the
flag-draped coffins and place them on the truck. But they leave the
sixth coffin where it lies as the truck pulls away.

Muharto tells Cameron that the sixth coffin, presumably containing Bob's
remains, could not be buried with the others because he was a foreigner.
Muharto's expression as he finishes his reminiscences convinces Cameron
that he regarded Freeberg as a close friend, and is seeking closure
about his mysterious disappearance. As Cameron rises to leave, Muharto
wonders that if he had turned down promotion and had been with Bob on
the final flight, maybe it would not have ended in tragedy.

Cameron writes up the interview, and gives it to managing editor Sabam
Siagian, who had given him the assignment. Sabam glances at the copy,
grunts, then passes the pages to Syd Jardine, the senior copy editor.
Syd reads it carefully, then remarks that Freeberg comes off as a
"super-pilot" and not believable. He suggests Cameron find other
accounts of Bob by researching in the reference section of the newly
opened National Library.

The following day, Cameron uses his Jakarta Post credentials to gain
access to the reference section of the National Library. Julia
Suryakusuma, an attractive, bookish woman in her early 20s, is the only
staffer speaking fluent English, and so is assigned to assist him, as
visitors are now allowing into the stacks. Cameron explains his mission,
and Julia disappears into the stacks, returning shortly with a few books
written by foreigners about the period. Skimming through the material,
Cameron's attention is drawn to a passage in a book by British diplomat
John Coast relating events at a gathering of foreign aviators in the
mountain town of Bukittinggi, a Republican base of operations.

On the evening of 8 March 1948 in the ballroom of the former Dutch
governor's palace in Bukittinggi, Richard Cobley, a semi-piratical
British aviator, drunkenly accuses Bob of taking the best
blockade-running contracts through his close relationship with the
Indonesian government. Later, while Bob stumbles along an unlit path to
his lodgings, Cobley confronts him, warning that an "accident" might
happen to his ramshackle Dakota unless he shares the wealth.

Muharto visits The Jakarta Post to personally thank Sabam and Cameron
for the article, and to tell them that he has been bombarded with calls
from old friends asking about what happened to the gold. Syd Jardine
says that since unloading a quarter ton of gold would require
considerable resources, discovering who might have had the motivation
and ability to transport and sell the gold could solve the mystery of
RI-002. Muharto agrees, and Cameron eagerly offers to help. Sabam gives
his grudging assent, but reminds Cameron that the Jakarta Post cannot be
involved, and he must to any research on his own time.

The following day, Cameron returns to the library to enlist Julia's
assistance in investigating the mystery by researching library archives.
Julia is eager to help, and disappears into the stacks, emerging with
bound volumes of Dutch-language newspapers. She reads aloud, in English,
news articles printed in the days after the disappearance.

On 5 October 1948, a reporter from the Bataviaasch Nieuwsblad newspaper
accosts General Spoor in the hallway and badgers him for information of
the fate of RI-002. Spoor claims ignorance, and grows visibly annoyed
when the reporter press him, breaking off the interview and slamming the
door to his office.

In the library, Julia tells Cameron that, by the tone of the language,
the reporter was convinced that Spoor was hiding something. She says
they might get more information from Victor de Jong, a Dutch-born,
naturalized Indonesian photographer who consults for the museum. Victor
had been a Dutch conscript assigned to KNIL headquarters as a
photographic assistant analyst.

Julia and Cameron enter the IPPHOS office, located on the ground floor
of a building in the old section of Jakarta and one inspection away from
being condemned. An ancient air conditioner wheezes over a window,
barely reducing the heat and humidity. Victor, a slight, elderly man of
sallow complexion, is the only person in the office and is openly
delighted at receiving company. Julia introduces Cameron and explains
the purpose of their visit. The negatives and prints are held in
tattered folders placed on shelves seemingly at random, but Victor
strides confidently to a shelf, pulls out a folder from the middle of a
pile, and brings it back to the desk. He leafs through the folder and
pulls out a strip of negatives showing a large American standing in
front of an airplane. It is Bob Freeberg and RI-002. Victor repeats the
process and shows Cameron images of Spoor in his office. Victor explains
that he was a recruit posted to KNIL headquarters as an photographer
analyst. His desk was close to Spoor's office, and remembers overhearing
Spoor raging that the Thai authorities had released Freeberg.

On 20 October 1947 at his desk outside Spoor's office at KNIL
headquarters, Victor overhears Spoor raging that the Thai authorities
had released Freeberg.

At IPPHOS, Victor searches for more shots of Batavia to prod his memory
about Spoor's efforts to stop the blockade runs. He stops when he comes
across a photo of a strikingly beautiful Indonesian woman who, though
dressed in baggy, paint-splattered overalls radiates elegance and poise.
The caption reads "Emeria Soenassa in her studio 1948". Julia asks
Victor who she is. Victor replies "No one important", snatches the photo
from the table and files it away.

After the meeting with Victor, Cameron invites Julia for coffee. She
agrees, but only if at a "respectable" hotel coffee shop. They settle on
the nearby Hotel Borobudur, a favorite of the Jakarta elite. Over
coffee, Julia tells Cameron of her dream of securing a scholarship to
pursue post-graduate studies in America. Cameron attempts, in turn, to
tell of his dreams of becoming an international investigative
journalist. But Julia stops him, saying, with a mischievious smile, that
if she wants to know anything about him she will simply ask her father,
who is a senior officer in military intelligence. Cameron puts down his
coffee, looks around involuntarily at the other customers, then tells
Julia he should be getting back to the Jakarta Post,

Muharto takes Cameron to a long-overdue reunion with Boediardjo, the
radio operator of RI-002. The two old comrades revel in recounting their
experiences on RI-002, including the time Bob dove into a tropical storm
to evade a Dutch patrol.

Bob drops paratroopers into the Kalimantan forest. This is the first
time in an aircraft for all, so Bob gives an inspiring pep talk to the
terrified troopers, translated by Boedi.

           \~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Bob and Boedi fly ten paratroopers to be dropped near an insurgent
stronghold in the forests of Kalimantan. None have jumped before, or
even been in a aircraft, so tension is high. There is an uproar as the
parachute of one trooper opens and dumps onto the cabin floor. The
trooper swears it was an accident, but all others accuse him of
cowardice. The troopers look at each other, wondering if any one will be
next. Boedi enters the cabin. Though he is only an airman, the
charismatic Boedi takes command of the situation, assuring the troopers
that Bob has much wartime experience flying paratroopers and will drop
them safely. He goes to the cockpit and talks with Bob for a moment. The
Bob turns the aircraft over to his co pilot, leaves his seat and stands
in the doorway, his body filling the frame. With Boedi translating, Bob
assures the troops that he has done this many times during the war, and
will drop them exactly on the requested target. Emboldened by Bobs air
of quiet competence, each trooper moves forward and shakes Bobs hand.
Bob returns to his seat, the dropmaster issues the command to jump, and
the cabin empties, save for the dropmaster and a lone recruit wondering
what fate is in store for him back at Maguwo. Boedi watches as the
parachutes drift down and land are enveloped by the endless forest.
Boedi asks Bob how many paradrops he made. Bob grins and answers: "None.
I was a Navy pilot. All my missions were over water."

Bob flies two Indonesian aviators, Halim and Iswandi, to Bangkok. to
purchase a twin-prop airplane that will become RI-003. Dutch authorities
pressure the Thai government to detain Freeberg as a blockade runner.
The Thais briefly detain Freeberg in a comfortable hotel room, but the
Indonesian crew must find their own accommodation. They can only afford
rooms in a bar district. Boedi is delighted, but Halim and Iswandi are
appalled. Both are engaged to be married, and worry that the families of
their respective fiancées will learn that they have stayed in such a
disreputable environment.

Julia is intrigued about Emeria, so she does some research in
Dutch-language art publications. Learns she was the first Indonesian
painter of modern art and a socialite with contacts at the highest
levels in both Dutch and Indonesian society.

Julia presses Victor to tell her more about Emeria.

Victor marches off a troop ship with other conscripts. While waiting for
transport to the barracks, Victor photographs a paper boy, then buys a
newspaper from him seconds before the police chase the boy away. The
other soldiers gather around Victor as he reads aloud in Dutch what is
obviously Indonesian-language text, occasionally pausing to look up a
word in a Dutch-Malay pocket dictionary.

Victor's familiarity with photography gains him a plum assignment to the
Mapping Dept, where he develops and classifies photographs taken by
field surveyors. Several of the Indonesian map makers are amateur
artists, and so Victor is invited to accompany them to the exhibitions
of Batavia's vibrant arts scene. At an event featuring the flamboyant
Dutch artist Auke Sonnega, the artist overhears Victor giving astute
criticism of his paintings. He introduces himself and suggests Victor
write up some notes and send them, along with the photos, to a friend
who works for the Bataviaasch Nieuwsblad newspaper. Victor becomes a
regular contributor to the paper, covering the arts circuit and doing
photographic essays on street life, all while concealing his status as a
KNIL recruit.

When Victor arrives at work on day, he sees a sealed envelope on his
desk that he knows to be reassignment orders. He opens the envelope with
dread, certain that he is being sent to a combat unit. But the orders
are for Victor to report to KNIL headquarters, where he will work with
Spoors intelligence unit.

Victor attends a solo exhibition by Emeria at the Kuntskring. She lays
on the charm, and he promises to write a review of her work in the BN.

Through Emeria, Victor meets prominent Republican figures, who Spoor and
the colonial government seek to portray as opportunistic thugs and
bandits. Victor is astounded to discover that most are well-educated
with sophisticated and pragmatic political beliefs.

One morning in October 1988, Cameron accompanies Muharto to a village on
the upper slopes of the Merapi volcano to meet Muharto's spiritual
advisor, Mbah Maridjan. The three hike the steep incline to a shrine;
effortlessly in the case of the sexagenarian duo of Muharto and
Maridjan; with some difficulty by their companion, some four decades
their junior. Cameron watches respectfully as the two intone Islamic
prayers, then lay Hindu-style floral offerings at the shrine to the gods
of the mountain.

Later that day, Muharto takes Cameron to the Air Force museum, a
re-purposed hanger filled with decommissioned aircraft and other
exhibits. Muharto points to a model of the Zogling training glider, and
tells Cameron of training village boys who had never seen an airplane to
become skilled pilots in mere weeks. Grinning, he tells of the time he
fly one himself.

In September 1946, Muharto pulls rank and commandeers the Zogling
training glider pulled by a Harley Davidson engine. When he lands,
Suryadarma is waiting, and angrily orders him back to his desk.

In the museum, Muharto seeks out the curator, who invites them into his
office. Muharto asks the curator to retrieve scraps from the RI-002
wreckage stored at the museum. One of the items is the dynamo with the
bullet inexplicably lodged in the windings. Muharto picks it up, and
from his point of view, the room around him fades into mist.

Muharto is astounded to realize he is somehow in the radio nook of
RI-002 on the day of the crash. The airplane shutters as the engines
scream in protest. Muharto sees two shadowy figures in the pilot seats,
and a forested mountainside fills the window.

The museum office comes back into focus, and Muharto sees the concerned
faces of Cameron and the curator. Muharto places the dynamo back into
the storage box and says, in a wavering voice, that they will miss their
train back to Jakarta if they don't hurry.
