# September 1988 : Sabam Assigns Muharto Interview

Cameron Bishop, an well-groomed American in his mid-twenties who
displays the intellectual arrogance of an Ivy-league post-grad student,
stands at the desk of a middle-aged Indonesian reporter, his shirt
wrinkled and sweaty from a long day on his beat. Cameron points to a
sheet of paper on the desk and lectures the older man in a condescending
manner about his minor mistakes in English grammar.

Sabam Siagian, a distinguished middle-aged Indonesian man wearing a
freshly pressed Safari suit, walks past, and notices the annoyance on
the reporter's face. Cameron sees Sabam and follows him into his office.
Sabam sits at a desk taking up most of the space of the cramped office,
almost disappearing behind precariously balanced piles of folders and
documents, and starts searching for something. Cameron tries to pitch a
story idea, but Sabam waves him off, reminding the American that he is a
foreigner working in a technical capacity as an English-language
consultant, and not an accredited correspondent. The government is very
strict on this matter, Sabam reminds him.

Then Sabam relents, looks through his papers, and pulls out a card,
handing it to Cameron. Sabam explains that an long-time friend, Petit
Muharto Kartodirdjo, a former Air Force officer, has an interesting
story to tell about an American blockade runner who mysteriously
vanished on 1 October 1948. The coming Saturday will mark the 40-year
anniversary of the disappearance. Since this is only a feature story in
a weekend edition about a historical incident, there is no harm in
letting Cameron do the interview. Besides, Sabam continues, no one else
has time to spare.

# September 1988 : Cameron Interviews Muharto

Petit Muharto, a lively, dapper Indonesian in his late 60s, is sitting
with his wife Ani in their cosy living room in the Jakarta suburbs when
they hear the roar of a large motorcycle approaching. Muharto, in jest,
covers his ears, and is then surprised when the motorcycle stops in
front of their house. A moment later, there is a knock on the door. Ani
opens it to find Cameron, in jeans and motorcycle boots, asking for
Muharto. Once over his surprise at being interviewed by a "Hell's Angel"
Muharto tells the story of the Bob Freeberg and RI-002, beginning with a
surprising telephone call he received while on duty in Maguwo Air Base
in Jogjakarta.

# June 1947 : Surprise Call

Muharto receives a telephone call from Pang Suparto, an army officer
serving at a base in Tasikmalaya. about 300 km to the west of
Jogjakarta. Pang tells Muharto that a foreign pilot has landed a C-47
military cargo aircraft on a nearby beach. When Pang, who speaks little
English, questioned the pilot, he asked for Muharto by name. Muharto
reports the surprising call to Suryadarma, the commander of the Air
Force. Suryadarma grins, saying: "Must be one of your foreign flyboys",
and sends Muharto to Tasik to investigate.

# September 1988 : Flight to Tasik

Muharto tells Cameron that he flew to Tasik in a powerful, open-cockpit
monoplane flown by a pilot barely out of his teens and who had not even
seen an airplane until the previous year. During the 30-minute flight,
Muharto says he pondered who the American pilot might be, and decided it
must be Bob Freeberg. He remembered meeting Freeberg two months before
when he accompanied the third blockade run he had organized with the
Manilia-based CALI charter airline.

# March 1947 : Third CALI Run

Muharto stands in the cockpit between Bob and his co-pilot, guiding the
aircraft by landmarks he has seen twice before on previous blockade
runs. But today, overcast obscures the terrain save tops of the
volcanoes poking through the clouds. Miss Brown, a comely Filipina who,
incongruously, is the stewardess on what is basically an illegal flight,
hands Muharto a cup of tea, then looks at the solid overcast with
obvious concern.

Bob points to the peaks and asks if there is any high ground in between.
Muharto thinks for a moment, then replies: I don't think so. Nothing
above a few hundred meters. To Muharto's horror, Bob noses the aircraft
down through the overcast, emerging perilously close to the terrain.
Muharto gulps, and frantically looks for any type of landmark. He sees a
rail line that he knows will lead them through valleys and plains all
the way to Jogja. He tells Bob to follow that line, and Jogja appears a
few minutes later, to Miss Brown's great relief.

# March 1947 : Bob Meets Suryadarma

As the aircraft is being unloaded and refueled for the return to
Singapore, Muharto introduces Bob to Suryadarma, who thanks him for his
assistance. Then Suryadarma takes Muharto aside and tells him that this
will be his last blockade run. An Indian businessman has offered to link
India with the Republic with his own Dakota, VT-CLA, and has the full
support of the Indian government. Muharto is both pleased at this
display of crucial international support, and dismayed that once again
he will be desk-bound. However, thanks to Bob, his last flight will be a
memorable one.

# March 1947 : Landing at Karangendah

Before takeoff on the return trip to Singapore, Muharto asks Bob if he
can attempt a landing on a refurbished Japanese airstrip at Karangendah.
Bob readily agrees. They circle the strip and Bob ponders the attempt.
Muharto asks if he can land a plane this size. Bob replies that he did
this all the time in the war. He can "land on a dime and give you a
nickel change."

Bob makes a spectacular landing, engines roaring with reverse thrust.
Muharto asks if he can take off again. Bob replies: "I hope so. We seem
to be smack dab in the middle of nowhere."

Santoso, the base commander climbs aboard to meet them. After a short
conversation, Santoso exits, and Bob takes off, the wheels finally
lifting off the runway a few meters before the end.

# March 1947 : Drop Over Bukittinggi

The CALI Dakota flies over the Bukit Barisan mountaintops, and drops
into a valley toward the town of Bukittinggi. At Muharto's direction,
Bob passes low over an airstrip, which is full of potholes and unusable.
The co-pilot leaves his seat and goes to the cargo compartment,
motioning to Miss Brown and Muharto to sit down far from the door. The
two other passengers are donning parachutes and preparing to jump. The
co-pilot wrenches open the door, and scraps of paper and cardboard swirl
as the air stream enters the cabin. The two parachutists jump out the
door. Muharto looks out of the window behind him, sees the parachutists
land squarely on the airstrip, and remarks on Freeberg's piloting
skills.

# September 1988 : On the Beach

Muharto tells Cameron that he met Pang Suparto at the Tasik army base.
They brought two barrels of aviation fuel to the beach where the mystery
aircraft is stranded. When Muharto saw the beach, bookended by two
rivers and the gap between the water and palm trees scarcely wider than
the Dakota's wing span, he knew that he had been correct in his guess.
Of all the CALI pilots he had met, only Bob Freeberg had the skill to
make that landing.

# June 1947 : First Mission

The Dakota lands in Jogjakarta, where Suryadarma commissions Bob to fly
a cargo of high-value quinine to Manila and return with essential
medicines and spare parts. The war-surplus Dakota is still unregistered,
so to forestall potential problems with Philippine authorities, Muharto
suggests that the designation RI-002 be painted on the tail. Bob
protests that since his is the first aircraft registered by Indonesia,
it should be RI-001. Suryadarma explains the RI-001 is being held in
reserve for a future presidential aircraft, which cannot be owned by a
foreigner.

# June 1947 : Beach Landing

Muharto arrives on Cilotok Beach and sees that the pilot is Bob
Freeberg. Muharto and Pang rally the local villagers to construct an
emergency runway of bamboo matting, and Freeberg's Dakota takes off and
flies to Jogja.

# June 1947 : First Flight of RI-002

Muharto, Boedi and Pang are sitting in the radio nook, where Boedi is
trying to fix the radio. He hears static, and when he pushes the
transmit key, there is a loud pop and a wisp of smoke from the unit. He
turns to his comrades and joins the hushed discussion about the
uncertain reception in Manila. Then they all look to the cockpit, where
Bob is at his fourteenth hour at the controls, showing no sign of
fatigue. The three turn to look at each other and say, in unison, "Let's
do this".

# June 1947 : Setting The Flaps

Bob invites Muharto to sit in co-pilot seat and assist him with the flap
controls during the final approach to Manila. But when Bob gives the
command, the nervous Muharto pushed the levers to full, causing the
Dakota lurch downward. Bob instantly repositions the levers, and gently
reminds Muharto to not pass the half-flaps setting until they see the
runway.

# June 1947 : Co Pilot

At the airport, Muharto falsely identifies himself as co-pilot, thereby
saving Bob from an infraction of aviation regulations.

# June 1947 : Subjects of the Queen

Muharto stays with Bob's friend Tom Lee, a government lawyer. Over
breakfast, Tom reads the newspaper headlines about "Fearless Bob
Freeberg" and his "Javanese Crew". One article reports that the Dutch
are laying claim to the valuable quinine cargo as the "Javanese Crew"
are "subjects of the Dutch Queen".

# June 1947 : Quinine Case

Salipada Penatun, who is also a sitting senator with extensive
high-level contacts, lays out the legal justification for ownership of
the quinine, then lets Muharto give an impassioned plea, claiming that
the money from selling the quinine will buy medicines and other
essentials unavailable in the besieged capital. The Dutch counter by
calling a plantation expert to testify that the Republic does not have
the capability to process quinine, so the drug must have been produced
in a Dutch-owed factory before the war. Muharto jumps to his feet, ready
to protest this insult to his people's technological skill, but Penatun
motions for him to sit down, then calmly tells the judge: "A foreigner
is not qualified to discuss the internal matters of the sovereign
Republic of Indonesia."

The judge considers this argument with some sympathy and adjourns the
session, promising a decision in a short time.

# July 1947 : Madras Curry

As they wait for a buyer for the quinine Muharto, Boedi, and Pang eat a
single meal each day, all at the cheapest restaurant they can find:
Madras Curry. Some days Bob joins them and pays the bill, inisting that
he is responsible for their well-being until he returns them safely to
Java.

# July 1947 : Wins Quinine Case

Muharto wins quinine case. Dutch are pissed.

# July 1947 : VT-CLA crashes

Bob invites Muharto and Boedi to his apartment for dinner and drinks to
celebrate their victory in court and plan their next moves. Bob says
that he and a partner in Singapore are setting up Southeastern airlines.
With two more aircraft, Bob can set up scheduled blockade runs between
Manila, Bangkok and Jogja, like a regular airline. Boedi turns on Bob's
shortwave radio and searches for news broadcasts from the Indies. Then
they listen in horror to reports that VT-CLA, an Indian-registered
Dakota that had made many blockade runs, had been shot down on approach
to Maguwo. Muharto turns to Bob and asks if he is still willing to aid
the Republic by flying through the blockade at the risk of being shot
down. Bob nods.

# September 1947 : Money for Nothing

One day, Muharto attempts to pay for their meals at Madras Curry,
explaining that it is an honorarium for a talk to a group of the lady
lawyers. To his surprise, Bob chastises him for "taking money for
nothing".

# September 1947 : Non Stop to Jogja

RI-002 returns to Jogja, flying non-stop to conceal the presence of
Captain Espina. They reach Java after dusk, with landmarks difficult to
discern in the gloom. After some hesitation, during which tension rises
in the cockpit, Muharto draws upon a vivid schoolboy memory to identify
a range of hills and guides the aircraft to Jogja.

# 

# October 1947 : Bob Meets Soekarno

Muharto takes Bob to meet Soekarno At the presidential palace. As was
his custom in private conversation, Soekarno treats Bob as an equal and
urges him to stay and help the struggle.

# November 1947 : Last Corned Beef

Bob invites Muharto to join him for dinner at the Hotel Merdeka. Bob is
embarrassed when a waiter insists he be served the last can of American
corned beef left behind by visiting United Nations officials.

# November 1947 : Mission to Bagiuo

Freeberg, Muharto and Boedi fly Republican economists and other experts
to Manila to meet with United Nations representatives in the hill town
of Baguio. During the flight, the delegates, who are all prominent
figures in the Republic and have cosmopolitan backgrounds, treat Bob
with as much respect as do the hero-worshipping common people of Jogja.

# September 1988 : Muharto Investigates

Muharto tells Cameron that the situation was so chaotic, with the Dutch
threatening to invade the Republic, that a proper search of the rugged
terrain on the flight path was not possible. A few years previously
Muharto had began his own investigations in AURI archives, finding the
report of the team sent to investigate the crash site.

# April 1977 : Crash Site Investigation

Two wiry men dressed in shabby clothes lead a squad of airmen and their
officer, Lt. Sulaiman, through a forested hillside to the wreckage of
RI-002. The airmen set up camp and search the area. They find fragments
of a wing with the faded letters: RI-00, other airplane parts, including
a dynamo with a bullet wedged between the windings and armature. They
also find two empty wooden crates labeled with name of a gold mine in
Java, but a thorough search of the area does not find any trace of the
gold itself. The airmen dig through the earth around the wreckage,
finding unidentifiable fragments of human remains. With great reverence,
they clean the soil from the remains, wrap them in clean, white cloth
and place them in a backpack. Sulaiman takes a last look around the
site, then orders his men to pack up and leave, taking with them the
remains and pieces of wreckage small enough to carry.

# July 1977 : The Sixth Coffin

In an otherwise empty hanger, five coffins draped in Indonesian flags
lay on a platform. A sixth coffin, larger than the rest and without a
flag, rests on a separate platform. A flatbed truck pulls into the
hanger and a squad of airmen, in silence, pick up each of the coffins
and place them on the truck. But they leave the sixth coffin where it
lies as the truck pulls away.

# September 1988 : Muharto Regrets

Muharto tells Cameron that the sixth coffin, presumably containing Bob's
remains, could not be buried with the others because he was a foreigner.
Muharto says that during the past years he has written to his contacts
in the air force and to the officers who participated in the crash-site
investigation, but received only vague, non-committal replies -- or only
silence.

Muharto's expression as he finished his reminiscences convinces Cameron
that he regarded Freeberg as a close friend, and is seeking closure
about his mysterious disappearance. Muharto wonders that if he had
turned down promotion and had been with Bob on the final flight, maybe
it would not have ended in tragedy.

# September 1988 : Syd Edits Cameron

Cameron sits at his desk, making final corrections on a paper copy of
his article. Sabam emerges from his office, waving a copy of the Jakarta
Post newspaper, ands strides into the newsroom. Cameron stands up to
give the article draft to Sabam, but the editor ignores him and goes to
the adjacent desk of Syd Jardine, a disheveled, chain-smoking, older
American. Sabam slams the newspaper on his desk, points to an article
entitled "Ladyboy Molested By Sex-Crazed Gang", with the byline: "Our
Reporter" and shouts: "This is a family newspaper!".

As Sabam turns, Cameron gives Sabam the sheets of paper. He scans the
first page, grunts, gives the sheets to Syd carries them back to his
office. As Syd reads the draft, Cameron reaches over from his adjacent
desk, takes the paper, chuckles, and says "This is your best yet. Where
did you get it?" Syd replies: "A becak driver showed it to me as he
drove me back from the bar. We had a good laugh about it. If you really
want to understand a people, read the tabloids."

Syd finishes reading the piece, and says it needs a photo of Freeberg
himself, not just the generic photos of AURI aircraft that Muharto gave
him. Syd suggests that Cameron try the Indonesian Photo Agency, IPPHOS,
who have an extensive collection of images from the period. An elderly
Dutch-born photojournalist, Victor, looks after the place. "He will find
one", Syd says. "He has, literally, a 'photographic memory'".

# September 1988 : Cameron Meets Victor

Cameron enters the IPPHOS office, a ramshackle collection of tables and
filing cabinets housed in a colonial-era building one government
inspection away from condemnation. The sole occupant is an elderly white
person who, indeed, is Victor. When Cameron makes his request, Victor
goes straight to a filing cabinet, pulls out a drawer, and retrieves a
photograph of Freeberg, dressed in greasy mechanic's overalls, speaking
with Suryadarma on the Maguwo tarmac.

Cameron asks the fee for using the photograph. Victor replies "two
coffees" and points to a warung on the sidewalk. Cameron shrugs, buys
the coffees, returns, and sits a table. Victor asks Cameron to give his
regards to Syd, and then asks for more details about the Muharto
interview. Cameron recaps, and ends by repeating Muharto's suspicion
that much remains to be discovered. Victor says: "Of course. Spoor was
behind it all. He hated Freeberg with an all-consuming passion."

# November 1947 : Spoor pissed at Bob

A young Victor dressed the the fatigues of a KNIL private sorts
photographs at a table outside of the office of General Simon Spoor.
Through the open door, Victor hears Spoor's voice rise in frustration as
he is briefed about daily blockade runs of a Dakota marked with the
fictional designation RI-002, and piloted by a free-booting American
named Bob Freeberg.

# October 1988 : Muharto Visits Post

The day after the Freeberg article is published, Muharto visits Jakarta
Post to pick up any available extra copies to give to friends and
colleagues. Sabam invites Muharto to sit at the staff table in the
newsroom while he waits, and orders tea for him. Cameron and Syd grab
their coffees, Syd pouring a splash of whiskey into his, and sit with
him. Syd asks Muharto some questions about his investigation of the
disappearance. Muharto replies that his researches into the AURI
archives and interviewing former officers only raised more questions
that they answered.

# April 1977 : Mysterious Clearing

Sulaiman, the team leader, notes evidence that a sizable group had
camped previously at the crash site. This visit had been made in the
past year, Sulaiman assumes, as the rapid vegetation growth in this
tropical rain forest would have obliterated all signs of their presence
in a few months. Sulaiman can determine where the mysterious visitors
had set up their tents, cooking area, and latrine, all typical of a
military camp.

# January 1985 : Muharto Interviews officers

Muharto sits at his desk, which is filled with papers, and makes several
telephone calls. The recipients of the calls, all middle-aged men in
civilian dress but military bearing, shake their heads to convey that
they have no information to offer.

# October 1988 : Cameron Curious

Muharto tells Cameron and Syd that he is still disturbed by the
inability, or perhaps reluctance, of the retired officers to provide
information. Muharto wonders if they know what had happened to the gold.
If, as Sulaiman suspected, the crash site had been visited by a military
outfit, who would have been capable of extracting the gold, then perhaps
the officers did not want to stir up trouble.

An office boy arrives with a stack of copies for Muharto. He thanks
everyone and takes his leave. Cameron tells Syd that, if what Muharto
suspects is correct, this is a great story. Syd advises Cameron to not
get involved, as who knows where this might lead. But Cameron is
adamant, so Syd suggests he invent a cover story. Cameron agrees, and
later tells Sabam that he would like to do more research into the story
as a basis for a grad-school paper when he returns home. Sabam wishes
him luck, and recommends a book he had found in the reference section of
the newly opened National Library a few weeks before. Sabam also reminds
Cameron to do this on his own time, and not to involve the Jakarta Post.

# October 1988 : Cameron Meets Julia

Cameron visits the National Library. Using his Jakarta Post credentials,
he is admitted to the limited-access reference section, an archive of
publications and books dating back to colonial times. The attendant on
duty is Julia, an attractive, bookish Indonesian woman in her early
twenties. She demonstrates an impressive competence when he gives her
the list of documents from Sabam. Julia disappears into the stacks and
reappears almost immediately with an armload of binders and books, which
she dumps on the reading table. As Cameron starts to read, Julia offers
to translate any Dutch-language clippings.

# February 1948 : Recruit to Revolution

In *Recruit to Revolution*, John Coast describes Freeberg as "America's
Best Ambassador" after their first meeting. Nevertheless, he notes that
American officials in Batavia, who want the Indies to remain in Dutch
hands, disapprove of his activities.

# October 1988 : Lunch with Julia

After three hours of reading, Cameron asks Julia where he can get a
coffee. Julia is scheduled for a break herself and escorts Cameron to
the canteen. Julia tells Cameron about her desire to take her post-grad
degree overseas. Cameron, grinning to show he is entirely in jest, says
that she should, because she does not seem to be an Indonesian, as
Indonesians always ask him personal questions like his age and marital
status. Julia replies: "Don't worry, I won't bother you. If I want to
know anything about you I'll just ask my dad". At Cameron's quizzical
look, Julia smiles and explains that her father is a colonel with the
Army's intelligence section, which is known to keep close tabs on the
activities of journalists. Though plainly Julia is teasing Cameron in
return he nonetheless gulps down coffee and says he should get back to
work.

# October 1988 : Cameron Meets Boedi

Sabam passes along an invitation to Cameron to attend a reception for
some Harvard alumni visiting Jakarta on study tour. The reception is at
the home of Boediardjo, a former information minister and senior Air
Force officer. Cameron discovers that he is the Boediardjo mentioned by
Muharto as the radio officer of RI-002. At Cameron's urging, he tells
amusing anecdotes of his days with RI-002 to his guests.

# October 1947 : Kalimantan Paradrop

Bob and Boedi fly ten paratroopers to be dropped near an insurgent
stronghold in the forests of Kalimantan. None have jumped before, so
tension is high. There is an uproar as the parachute of one trooper
opens and dumps onto the cabin floor. The trooper swears it was an
accident, but all others accuse him of cowardice. The troopers look at
each other, wondering if any one will be next. Boedi enters the cabin.
Though he is only an airman, the charismatic Boedi takes command of the
situation, assuring the troopers that Bob has much wartime experience
flying paratroopers and will drop them safely. He goes to the cockpit,
talks with Bob for a moment, then tells each trooper to approach the
cockpit and shake Bob's hand. They do so, and are emboldened by Bob's
air of quiet competance. The dropmaster issues the command to jump, and
the cabin empties, save for the dropmaster and a lone recruit wondering
what fate is in store for him back at Maguwo. Boedi watches as the
parachutes drift down and are enveloped by the endless forest.

# October 1947 : Detained in Bangkok

Bob flies two Indonesian aviators, Halim and Iswandi, to Bangkok. There,
they will purchase an Avro-Anson and fly it back to Jogja as RI-003. Bob
is detained by Thai authorities at the insistence of Dutch diplomats,
Bob is accomodated in a comfortable hotel room, but the others, who are
not detained, must find cheap beds among the hookers and petty criminals
of a Bangkok red-light district. Boedi is delighted, but Halim and
Iswandi worry about appearances, as both will marry immediately after
completing their mission. A few days later, Bob is released in a tacit
recognition by Thai authorities of the legitimacy of the new Republic of
Indonesia.

# June 1948 : Soekarno tour

Soekarno Tour props up support for the independence struggle and to
raise money to purchase a presidential aircraft, to be named RI-001. Bob
flies low over a town where an important regional leader lives to
determine whether he can land RI-002 safely on an overgrown grass
airstrip. Bob decides not to risk the safety of his passengers, which
infuriates Soekarno. He demands that Bob land on the strip, declaring:
"I'm the president!" Bob replies, in a measured tone and pointing
downward: "Down there, sir, indeed you are the president. But up here,
I'm the captain."

# August 1947 : Bob Walters Complains

The gregarious and charismatic Boedi had been wholly accepted by the
Aviation Brotherhood, the freewheeling foreign pilots seeking their
fortunes or reliving wartime adventures in often-dangerous charter
flights into remote areas of the region.

Over drinks in the AB bar, Boedi learns more about Bob, particularly the
recognition by his peers that he is the most skillful and courageous
aviator in Southeast Asia. Boedi also learns that Freeberg is in
considerable financial difficulty, and is in a legal battle with another
aviator, Bob Walters, his partner in purchasing the aircraft now known
as RI-002. Walters is scathing in his condemnation, calling Bob a thief
and a con man.

# August 1947 : Company Man

Boedi and Muharto enjoy a brief respite from their meager diet when Tom
Lee invites them for drinks and dinner. Tom Lee asks Muharto and Boedi
about the political situation in Java. Boedi attempts to the steer the
conversation onto a neutral subject, but Tom presses the inquiry, and
Muharto obliges with more detailed info. As Tom pays the bill at the
counter, Muharto tells Boedi that he is pleased the Tom has such an
interest in our struggle. Muharto says he is guilty about accepting such
generosity from the American, and hopes that when the quinine his sold
he can treat Tom to dinner.

######### document:metadata.reference:5025567

Boedi invites Cameron to keep him posted on his investigation. And he
has a lot more stories to tell.

# October 1988 : Julia Rides a Harley

Cameron and Julia realize that they are now headed to the same
destination: the Hotel Borobudur, a nearby luxury hotel, where she will
meet friends in the coffee shop, and he a mate at the bar. Cameron
offers Julia a ride. She accepts, and is nonplussed when he takes her to
an army surplus Harley Davidson motorcycle in the parking lot. During
the thrilling ride, she briefly grabs Cameron's waist, to her
embarrassment.

# October 1988 : Bule Kaya

Cameron and Julia walk into the lobby of the Hotel Borobudur together,
where her friends are waiting. Julia introduces Cameron to them, then he
walks toward the bar. Julia's friends grill her about the bule, with
Julia insisting that they are not even friends, just new acquaintances.

Afterward, Julia tries to contribute to the bill, but her friends laugh,
saying "Honest Eddy's daughter can't afford to pay for her own drinks!"
If she wants to pay her own way, they say, she had better get her claws
into "Harley Boy".

# October 1988 : Cameron goes to Earthquake

Syd takes Cameron to the Earthquake Bar for a drink He introduces
Cameron to the owner, Sanyoto, an Air Force drill sergeant during the
revolution and fixer for a large foreign company. Sanyoto maintains wide
contacts in the highest levels of government and the military, so the
Earthquake is popular with generals and cabinet ministers. Sanyoto tells
Cameron he is always welcome here, as long as he minds his manners and
doesn't "needle" any of his regular guests.

# May 1946 : Bambang Saptoadji Messes Landing

Bambang Saptoadji messes up a landing during an air show, severely
damaging one of the Republic's few serviceable aircraft.

# July 1947 : Crushing Disappointment

As the others take to the air to bomb Dutch positions, Bambang is crused
to discover that the machine gun on his fighter is not working. He can
only watch in frustration as the other bombers and fighters take off to
bomb Dutch facilities on the North coast.

# November 1947 : Bob Gives Bambang

Bob gives Bambang a flying lesson in RI-002. Problems arise because of
Bambang's weak command of English.

# October 1988 : Julia Admires Ani

As research continues, Cameron and Julia spend time with Petit and Ani
Muharto. As Cameron and Muharto discuss their progress and plan their
next moves, Julia takes notes and suggests avenues of research. But when
the conversation turns to speculation into CIA and Spoor planning a
coup, Julia drifts away and seeks out Ani. Julia listens, in awe, of Ani
recounting of life in Jogja during the revolution. Ani tells of her
growth from a naive teenager thinking only of making a household to a
committed champion of the people, volunteering to teach and to feed the
swelling population of refugees.

# June 1947 : Ani Serves Rice

Ani serves rice to refugees. She has no idea what to do in kitchen,
never having been in one before.

# October 1947 : Ining Will Train Students

Muharto moves Ining into a house on Jalan Jetis on the slopes of Mount
Merapi, adjacent to the forested areas where Ining will train students
to become guerrilla fighters. They toast the occasion with whiskey
brought from Manila.

# November 1947 : Muharto Asks George

Muharto asks George to keep Ining company in Muharto's absence. George
witnesses Ining berate the young recruits and sees the displeasure on
their faces. Back in the house, Ining asks George to bring whiskey next
time he visits.

# November 1947 : Ining Asks To Return

Ining writes a letter Primitivo, asking to be relieved of his assignment
and returned home. He rushes to Maguwo, but is seconds too late to give
it to Muharto to take to Manila on RI-002. George, on duty as flight
controller, is on the tarmac. He sees that Ining is upset, so he asks
Muharto's brother, Mas Ded, to take Ining back to Jalan Jetis and stay
with him.

# October 1947 : Victor Meets Koke

Walter Foote arrives at Spoor's office with a guest, Robert Koke. Julius
Tahija apologizes that Spoor will be busy for a few more minutes and
invites them to wait. Tahija calls out "Nyoman" (a common name in Bali)
to an office boy. Nyoman enters the room and asks what they would like
to drink while they wait. Koke replies in fluent Balinese. Nyoman is
astounded, and Koke explains that he lived in Bali for many years before
the war. Victor is intrigued, and chats with Koke, who is charming and
affable, but evasive. Julius calls them to enter, Victor follows, camera
at the ready. Spoor waves him away, saying "No photos". Victor clicks
the shutter, coughing to hide the sound, and then leaves.

# December 1947 : Smuggling Fine China

Spoor is dumbfounded when he reads the report of the investigation of
the RI-003 crash site. Instead of guns, the airplane was full of
household goods.

# December 1947 : Crash Of RI003

During a routine radio contact, Boedi learns that RI-003 has crashed in
Malaysia.

# August 1947 : Primitivo Introduces Muharto

During the long wait to sell the quinine, Muharto acts as de facto
military representative of Indonesia with the Philippines. He meets
Major Primitivo of the intelligence service, who introduces Muharto to
Captain Ignacio Espina, a guerrilla soldier during the Japanese
occupation. Espina, nicknamed Ining, will accompany RI-002 back to
Jogja, where he will transfer his guerrilla warfare skills to the young
militia members of the Tentara Pelajar, the Student Army.

# September 1947 : Ining Buys Drinks

At the party to celebrate the sale of the quinine, Ining shows himself
to be a party animal, buying rounds for his companions and flirting with
the foreign women in the Aviation Brotherhood bar. When he hits on the
teenage daughter of an American army officer, tempers flare, and
Freeberg and Boedi have to hustle him outside.

# December 1947 : Ining Was Found Dead

During a routine radio contact with Jogja, Boedi learns that Ining and
Mas Ded had been found, both dead from gunshot wounds, at Jalan Jetis.

# December 1947 : Muharto Reports Incident

Muharto reports the incident to Primitivo. To Muharto's consternation,
the major accuses Mas Ded and Muharto of being communists, and so
complicit in Ining's death.

# December 1947 : Changi Layover

RI-002 is forced to land at Changi. The local Dutch authorities pressure
the British into declaring the Dakota not-airworthy.

# January 1948 : Savage Complains

Bob and Boedi run into Hugh Savage at the Raffles. Savage says that he
has done nothing to start Southeastern. Savage complains the Walters has
scared investors away.

# January 1948 : Newspaper Calls Ining

Spoor reads newspaper report calling Ining a gun runner in an article in
a Manila newspaper after Ining's funeral speculates that Ining's death
resulted from an arms deal gone disastrously wrong.

# February 1948 : Deportation Offer

Bob takes June to a party thrown by Salipada Penatun to celebrate the
sale of the quinine. Salipada Penatun offers to have Walters deported.
Tom Lee suggests that such a move would have unintended consequences.
Bob thanks Penatun for his offer, but says they should just put
everything behind them.

# February 1948 : Bob Buys an Olds

Bob sends part of his share from the quinine sale to a automobile
dealership in Parsons to purchase an Oldsmobile for his parents.

# February 1947 : Bob Bought Suits

Bob finally bought new suits, . After purchasing the supplies ordered by
Suryadarma, Muharto and Boedi shopped for clothes for their fellow
officers.

# August 1947 : Company Man

Boedi and Muharto enjoy a brief respite from their meager diet when Tom
Lee invites them for drinks and dinner. Tom Lee asks Muharto and Boedi
about the political situation in Java. Boedi attempts to the steer the
conversation onto a neutral subject, but Tom presses the inquiry, and
Muharto obliges with more detailed info. As Tom pays the bill at the
counter, Muharto tells Boedi that he is pleased the Tom has such an
interest in our struggle. Muharto says he is guilty about accepting such
generosity from the American, and hopes that when the quinine his sold
he can treat Tom to dinner.

# November 1947 : Who Gets To Sit

Muharto and Bambang argue over who gets to sit in the right-hand seat.
Muharto insists that it is his right as mission leader. Bambang rejoins
that Muharto cannot actually fly. Bob and Boedi exchange wry glances as
the two spat.

# August 1947 : Ordering Suits

Bob orders suits from back home to suit his new role as businessman.
With the post-war shortage of textiles it is cheaper to order from US.

# March 1948 : Black Flights

Suryadarma orders Bob to transport several tons of Republican opium to
Bukittinggi.

# April 1948 : Cobley Accuses

During a party in Bukittinggi Cobley accuses Bob of monopolizing
Republican missions. Says he is taking the best business for himself,
especially since he is now running narcotics.

# May 1948 : Not Ready for Airplanes

Bob is annoyed when Bambang shows up late for opium run, forcing him to
cancel the mission.

# April 1948 : Major Criminal

Spoor decides to consider Freeberg a major drug smuggler, and orders his
fighters to use deadly force if they encounter RI-002.

# January 1948 : Cobley Makes Deal

Cobley makes a deal with finance ministry and registers Catalina as
RI-005. Suryadarma is annoyed at being circumvented.

# April 1948 : Bambang Cannot Conceal Envy

Bambang cannot conceal his envy of Moeljono when his fellow aviator
flies the twin-engine RI-005 Avro-anson from Bukittinggi to Jogjakarta.

# June 1947 : Arts Circle

Victor's familiarity with photography gains him a plum assignment to the
Mapping Dept, where he develops and classifies photographs taken by
field surveyors. Several of the Indonesian map makers are amateur
artists, and so Victor is invited to accompany them to the exhibitions
of Batavia's vibrant arts scene. At an event featuring the flamboyant
Dutch artist Auke Sonnega, the artist overhears Victor giving astute
criticism of his paintings. He introduces himself and suggests Victor
write up some notes and send them, along with the photos, to a friend
who works for the *Bataviaasch Nieuwsblad* newspaper. Victor becomes a
regular contributor to the paper, covering the arts circuit and doing
photographic essays on street life, all while concealing his status as a
KNIL recruit.

# August 1947 : Victor Meets Emeria

Victor covers an exhibition that includes a few paintings by Emeria
Soenassa, a charasmatic, stylish woman in her mid-thirties who is the
only female Indonesian modern artist. Emeria flirts with Victor, as she
does with Auke Sonnega and the other young Europeans at the event.

In the resulting article, Victor singles out Emeria as an exceptional
talent. Emeria contacts the newspaper to invite Victor to her studio and
see more of her work. Victor arrives one evening to find Emeria holding
court with several men who he recognizes as Indonesia artists, two of
them prominent. As Emeria shows Victor her work, the others drift away,
leaving them alone.

# October 1988 : Julia Researches Emiria

Intrigued by Victor's stories of Emeria, Julia searches the stacks for
articles mentioning her. A portrait emerges of an independent, eccentric
woman with close access to the highest levels of both the Republic and
the Dutch.

# November 1988 : Cameron suspects CIA

Victor shows Cameron the photo of Robert Koke, and tells of his
suspicion that Koke had been "The Quiet American" in Batavia. Cameron
ties this in with Boedi's assessment of Tom Lee, and comes to the
conclusion that Spoor had been plotting with the newly formed CIA to
overthrow the Republic and take control of the East Indies himself, as
had happened in South Africa.

# November 1988 : Syd Reveals History

Camerons tells Syd of his discovery. Syd warns Cameron to not jump to
conclusions as the CIA is given far more credit than what they have
actually done.

# November 1988 : Beres Sayang

Colonel Eddy tells Julia of his guilt in not being able to fulfill the
dreams of his only child. He tells Julia to start applying to
universities in Europe and America. When Julia asks where the tuition
money is coming from, Eddy holds up his hand and says: \" Beres Sayang
\", meaning she should not worry. Ok, says Julia, as long as you are not
planning to marry me off into rich family.

# October 1988 : Date With Eric

Julia goes on a date with Eric, which as set up by her father. Eric
dominates the conversation with boasting about the deal their respective
fathers are making with a Bruce Rappaport-style American stock hustler
to sell his father's company at an inflated price after the capital
market is deregulated. Julia objects that this is corruption, something
General Eddy has never done during his career. Eric dismisses her
concern, stating that: "It isn't corruption to take money from
foreigners."

# November 1988 : Expat Party

Cameron takes Julia to an expat party in Kemang, and she is mistaken for
a bar girl. Julia takes Cameron to a far corner of the garden and
screams at him in fury and humiliation, saying that all foreigners think
Indonesian women who hang around foreigners are either household
servants or hookers.

# May 1948 : Landing Gear Collapse

In Bukittinggi, Dave Fowler looks on in shock as the right-side landing
gear collapses just as RI-002 is planning to take off. Bob grins, and
says: "You know how it is. 99 times out of a hundred you can get away
with it." Fowler replies: "I guess this was the 100th time."

Bob and the ground crew jack up the wing on blocks as Bob resets the
gear, then walks along the wing checking for cracks. He sees one sizable
crack, kneels down to inspect it, then shouts to Fowler that "it will
hold", Bob goes back to the cabin, fires up the engines, and takes off
while Dave Fowler shakes his head.

# May 1948 : Bambang Gets Place

With the reassignment of Muharto to headquarters, Bambang gets his
coveted permanent spot in the right-hand seat of RI-002.

# June 1948 : Bambang Ingratiates Himself

Bambang ingratiates himself with Soekarno in the hope of being selected
to fly RI-001. Boedi finds his efforts, and Soekarno's condescending
replies, amusing.

# June 1948 : Bob Defies Suryadarma

Immediately after returning from the Soekarno Tour, Suryadarma orders
Bob to Sumatra on another mission. Bob flatly refuses.

######### document:metadata.reference:5040380

# July 1948 : Cobley Flies Cadres

Cobley secretly flies exiled communist cadres into a lake near the town
of Madiun.

# May 1948 : Ani And Formalize Their Engagement.

Ani and formalize their engagement.

# May 1948 : Muharto Wants To Decline

Muharto wants to decline promotion and keep flying because he is worried
about Bob, and saddened about the Smuggled Gems incident. But Ani
insists that he take a safe desk job.

# May 1947 : Ani Berates Muharto

Ani berates Muharto for trying to learn to fly. Better to stick to a
safe job as a bureaucrat, like his father.

# May 1948 : Promoted to Major

Suryadarma promotes Muharto to major and assigns him to desk duties at
Maguwo.

# December 1988 : Bob Requests Muharto Reassigned

Cameron tells Muharto that Bob had requested he be reassigned.

# April 1948 : Muharto Appalled

At a party in Manila, Muharto is appalled when one of Bob's housemates
boasts of shooting down his own squad leader during the war in Europe.
He tells Boedi that he doesn't think Bob's friends are entirely *bona
fide*, and worries what might happen if Bob tells them.

Boedi not to mention the gem smuggling to Bob, who might tell the
roommate. that he will not tell and other general debauchery. He decides
to not tell Freeberg about the smuggled gems in case his roommates find
out.

# April 1948 : Smuggled Gems

Muharto and Boedi report to Jogja on the RI-002 radio, then Muharto is
the last to leave RI-002. Boedi goes on ahead, Muharto stops to talk
with a Philippines army officer waiting in the hanger. Some time later,
when all the lights around the hangar have been extinguished, the
officer enters RI-002 and emerges a short time later with a small
package in his hand.

Major Primitivo Muharto and Boedi report to Jogja on the RI-002 radio,
then is the last to leave RI-002. Boedi goes on ahead, Muharto stops to
talk with a Philippines army officer waiting in the hanger. Some time
later, when all the lights around the hangar have been extinguished, the
officer enters RI-002 and emerges a short time later with a small
package in his hand.

# April 1948 : Bob Furious

Bob returns to RI-002 the following morning and is instantly aware that
someone had rummaged around his beloved Dakota the previous night. He
angrily confronts Muharto, who tells him about the deal with the jewels
to buy guns, and adds: "The jewels were entrusted to me by my
government," "They are my sole responsibility. This has nothing to do
with you." Bob replies: "Damn you, Muharto! It has everything to do with
me! I'm the captain---responsible for whatever happens on my ship,
whatever she carries. If you get caught, I also go to jail!"

# November 1988 : Santoso Trance

Hadi tells of stealing father's necklace. Muharto holds necklace and
goes into trance.

# August 1948 : Bob Returns

Bob returns from a six-week layover in Manila with both pilot and
aircraft in good shape.

# April 1048 : POAS Flights

Dave Fowler begins POAS flights from Bangkok to Jogja.

# August 1948 : Spoor Orders Night Patrol

Spoor orders a night patrol not to engage a blockade running POAS flight
because he is informed that American and other civilians are passengers.

# April 1948 : Partner Has Done Nothing

Bob learns that his partner Hugh Savage has done nothing to start
Southeastern airlines. Savage complains that Walter's constant
defamations had soured potential investors.

# August 1948 : Reconciling With Muharto.

Boedi talks Bob into reconciling with Muharto.

# September 1948 : SE Air Bankrupt

On his final trip to Singapore, Bob learns that Hugh Savage has filed
for bankruptcy of Southeast Airlines. Bob has lost all of his
investment.

# September 1948 : Spite Their Face

Over whiskey with Fowler, Muharto, and Boedi at Hotel Merdeka, Bob
complains about Suryadarma and some of his staff, saying they want this
or that but never follow through. He says that many Indonesians (present
company excepted) would cut off their nose to spite their face.

# September 1948 : Gold Run

Suryadarma reluctantly assigns Bob mission to transport gold to
Bukittinggi

# September 1948 : Fowler Refuses Request

Suryadarma orders Fowler to transport a quarter ton of gold to
Bukittinggi. Fowler refuses. He is certain the Dutch would know the
nature of the cargo, and this time would not hestiate to shoot him down
if intercepted.

# August 1948 : Suryadarma Takes Fowlers Fuel Allowance

Suryadarma takes away Fowlers fuel allowance. Dave resolves it by going
over Suryadarma's head, to Hatta.

# September 1948 : Suryadarma Takes Fuel Allowance

Suryadarma takes away Bob's fuel allowance.

# September 1948 : Ri-002 Drops Leaflets

RI-002 drops leaflets over Madiun. Santoso is valuable in pointing out
neighborhoods where residents may be receptive to message from
government to stay loyal to the Republic.

# September 1948 : Fighter Planes Tailing Him

While flying a group of international journalists to Jogja under cover
of darkness, Fowler believes he spots Dutch fighters flanking him. His
radio operator, a Dutch-speaking Indonesian monitoring military
frequencies, hears fighter pilots asking for instructions during an
intercept, thought his cannot pin down their location. The response is
the disengage, as "there are civilians on board". Looking out his
left-hand window, Fowler clearly sees the silhouette of a fighter, wings
almost vertical as it banks away.

# September 1988 : RI-002 Vanishes

Three weeks before the wedding Muharto is devastated to learn that
RI-002 is missing.

# October 1948 : Bambang Decides To Fly

Bambang decides to fly RI-002 back to Jogja, but crashes on Mount
Punggur.

# October 1948 : Muharto Marries

Ani and Muharto marry on a day marked by equal amounts and joy and
sadness.

# September 1948 : Bambang Studies Bob

During the propaganda leaflet run over Madiun, Bambang watches intently
as Bob puts RI-002 through tree-top maneuvers. The expression on
Bambang's face suggests that he would like to attempt these maneuvers
himself.

######### document:metadata.reference:5065043

------------------------------------------------------------------------

project: omaf identifier: 0e804f9b title: Cobley Attempts Engine Takeoff
date: 27 December 1948 location: Jambi status: Final Draft ---

# December 1948 : Ani Berates Westerling

Content to Come

# December 1948 : Victor Defects.

Victor is with Westerling when Ani berates him. Victor defects into
hills with friend of Emeria.

# November 1988 : Useful Idiot

Cameron uses his Jakarta Post credentials to gain access to Julius
Tahija. He asks some perfunctory questions about foreign investment,
then changes the subject to the revolution, and the time Tahija worked
for Spoor. Tahija is surprised at the question, but revels in the
opportunity to relive those exciting times. Cameron mentions Victor.
Tahija grins, and tells Cameron that Victor had been a "Useful Idiot",
an intellgence asset to keep tabs on the Indonesian painters, who were
all Republicans, and many were communists.

# November 1988 : Victor Suggests Julius

Victor and Cameron are certain that Spoor was planning a coup with the
help of the CIA. Victor suggests the next step should be to talk to
Julius Tahija. Victor remembers Julius as being honest and
straightforward. There is a good chance he will tell the true story.

# November 1988 : Useful Idiot

Cameron uses his Jakarta Post credentials to gain access to Julius
Tahija. He asks some perfunctory questions about foreign investment,
then changes the subject to the revolution, and the time Tahija worked
for Spoor. Tahija is surprised at the question, but revels in the
opportunity to relive those exciting times. Cameron mentions Victor.
Tahija grins, and tells Cameron that Victor had been a "Useful Idiot",
an intellgence asset to keep tabs on the Indonesian painters, who were
all Republicans, and many were communists.

# November 1988 : Sabam Furious

Sabam is furious at Cameron for interviewing Tahija without
authorization.

# December 1988 : Cameron Spills the Beans

In an unguarded (and unclothed) moment, Cameron tells Julia about the
Jakarta Post investigations into Army officers seeking to influence the
emerging capital market through leaking false information to pump up
stock values. Julia realizes that this must be the deal her father is
involved in.

# December 1988 : Julia Confronts Eddy

Julia begs her father not to sully his reputation as "Honest Eddy" by
participating in capital market manipulation, even though it means she
will not be able to study overseas. Eddy replies: "It's all right. It's
not corruption when you take money from foreigners."

######### document:metadata.reference:4999852

------------------------------------------------------------------------

identifier: b583d678 project: omaf title: Julia Finds Emeria location:
Jogjakarta date: December 1988 status: Synopsis

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Julia and Cameron go to Jogja with Muharto and Ani to visit parents
graves in honor of 40th anniversary and have a small party with
relatives Julia has found in a Jogja paper about a woman artist living
on the outskirts of Jogja. See contacts the reporter, claiming to be an
arts researcher, and gets the address. Julia goes alone and finds
Emeria. She says she regrets dumping Victor like that, but this was war.
She herself got a "colonial guilt" scholarship and moved to the Hague.
She could still have gotten a scholarship even in her mid-thirties,
especially if she took a few year off her age because she looks young.

She married a Dutch academic who had been one of the voices pushing for
Indonesian independence. She kept a low profile, raising children,
supporting her husband's work, and painting a little on the side. She
and her husband frequently visited Indonesia for conferences etc, but
she did not try to contact Victor. On her husband's death she moved back
to Jogja, where she still has many friends. "This is war. You have to
choose sides"

# December 1988 : Julia Finds Photo

While correctly placing a misfiled folder of a Batavia newspaper, Julia
finds an article about the disappearance of RI-002 illustrated by a
photo of RI-002 seemingly guarded by Dutch soldier. At IPPHOS, Victor
searches through the files and finds a shot of a runway with similar
hills in the background, labelled: Karangendah, Palembang.

# December 1988 : Syd Fills In

Cameron asks Syd to fill in while he takes three days off to go to
Karangendah. But Sabam also goes out of town, and the other editors
flake out leaving Sid alone on the copy desk. He works three triple
shifts, drinking for fuel and not eating, getting his vitamins from
chain-smoking cigarettes.

# December 1988 : Karangendah Raid

Anwar Congo reveals that gold was used to purchase guns smuggled from
Malaya, which then taken overland to Lampung by Sumatra preman.

# December 1988 : Syd Absent

Cameron returns from Karangendah on the morning flight and goes directly
to Syd's room to tell him the news. He finds his friend dead in his
favorite reading chair, a book on his lap and a glass of whiskey at his
side.

# December 1988 : Sabam Fires Cameron

Sabam learns of Karangendah exploit. On thin ice with Deppen because of
corruption story, Sabam has no choice but to fire Cameron and has his
visa canceled, effective immediately. Cameron has 24 hours to leave
Indonesia.

######### document:metadata.reference:4995678

Cameron tells Victor that Spoor was investigating corruption, not
planning a coup with the CIA. And that Emeria was just using him to get
information about Spoor.

# December 1988 : Cameron Says Goodbye

Cameron tells Julia that he has to tell Muharto that we don't know what
happened, that Agus thinks Bob might have been in on it. Julia says:
"Are you going to break the heart of two old men in one day?" Cameron
tells Muharto that Bob had been in chains and looked like he as beaten
up.
