**Logline:** A struggling young American journalist and an Indonesian
college student, both craving personal and professional freedom,
cooperate to investigate the mysterious disappearance of an American
pilot during Indonesia's war for independence four decades earlier. The
young couple's journey of discovery takes them from the cockpits of
blockade runners dodging Dutch fighters to the struggles of a rebel
capital under siege to the spies and smugglers hiding in plain sight in
the glittering artistic scene of post-war Batavia. When they finally
solve the mystery, they also learn what "freedom" really means.

\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

In **1988** in Jakarta, CAMERON BISHOP, an engaging, disheveled young
American toiling away as proofreader at an English-language newspaper,
interviews retired Indonesian Air Force Major PETIT MUHARTO about his
blockade-running missions with American naval veteran BOB FREEBERG
during Indonesia's post-war struggle for independence. Muharto tells
Cameron a story largely unknown in modern Indonesia: a gripping tale of
transporting medicine and other essential goods in Freeberg's
war-surplus cargo airplane, RI-002, while evading Dutch fighters, and
the veneration that embarrassed this modest Kansas farm boy. Muharto
concludes with the enduring mystery of the last flight, when RI-002
vanished while carrying a ton of gold bullion to Sumatra ahead of an
expected Dutch invasion of Jogjakarta.

The positive reaction to the published article and intense interest in
the fate of the gold cargo convinces Cameron that the saga of this
free-booting adventurer deserve more than a newspaper article. Cameron
and Muharto agree to join forces to investigate the mystery of RI-002,
and grant a forgotten hero his due recognition. Cameron's workmate SYD
JARDINE, an alcoholic, veteran foreign correspondent washed up in
Jakarta cautions against Freeberg being portrayed as a "white savior"
who single-handedly saved the nation. Syd advises Cameron to start his
research in the historical archives of the National Library to become
more familiar with the time and place.

Cameron enlists the assistance of JULIA SURYAKUSUMA, an attractive,
bookish young woman interning at the library while finishing her degree
undergraduate degree at the neighboring University of Indonesia. Julia
dreams of escaping her loving, but parochial military family, who are
pressuring her to marry a suitable boy, by obtaining a scholarship to
pursue a postgraduate degree overseas. Julia expertly extracts the
material Cameron needs from the stacks, and sight-translates excerpts
from Dutch-language books and newspapers.

Cameron discovers that two other foreign pilots had been active blockade
runners. American DAVE FOWLER had been a contract pilot with a
Bangkok-based charter airline with a formal contract with the Republican
government. Australian RICHARD COBLEY flew his own amphibious Catalina
aircraft, registered RI-005. Together, the cautious Fowler, fearless
Freeberg, and swashbuckling Cobley accounted for the majority of
blockade runs during **1948**.

The tone of articles in the Batavia newspapers reporting on the
disappearance of RI-002 suggested that the colonial military, KNIL, knew
more than they were letting on. Julia feels they need more insight into
the situation at KNIL at the time, so she takes Cameron to the IPPHOS
photo agency archive to meet VICTOR DE JONG, a slight, elderly man who
manages the archive and consults for the library. As a Dutch conscript,
Victor had worked directly for GENERAL SIMON SPOOR, the KNIL commanding
officer. After independence Victor had stayed on and taken Indonesian
citizenship. Pulling selections from the hundreds of thousands of images
in the photo archives to illustrate his recollections, Victor vividly
describes the frustrating struggles of Spoor and his officers to rein in
the blockade runners who so casually violated "Dutch" airspace.

For Cameron and Julia, the most surprising images were of the vibrant
cultural scene in **1948** Batavia. A talented artist himself, in his
off-duty hours and concealing his status as an active-duty recruit,
Victor had photographed exhibitions and wrote astute newspaper reviews
of the artists, many of whom were staunch Republicans not afraid to push
the horrors of the struggle into the faces of their oppressors. Julia
notices a photo of a strikingly beautiful Indonesian woman in her late
twenties who, though dressed in baggy, paint-splattered overalls,
radiates elegance and poise. The caption reads: "EMERIA SOENASSA in her
studio". Julia asks Victor who she is. Victor replies "No one
important", snatches the photo from the table and files it away.

At his favorite bar, the Earthquake, Syd introduces Cameron to the
owner, SANYOTO, a long-time friend and former reporting source. Sanyoto
had been a drill sergeant in the Air Force, and later enjoyed a
lucrative career as a fixer for foreign oil companies. Sanyoto maintains
wide contacts in the highest levels of government and the military, who
all regard him with great respect, so the Earthquake is popular with
senior military and government officials. Sanyoto is delighted to hear
of the investigation into the RI-002 mystery, and allows Cameron to
speak about it with his guests as long as he minds his manners.

One evening, the live band at the Earthquake plays *keroncong*, a
guitar-driven genre whose lilting melodies and sentimental
Dutch-language lyrics are adored by older Indonesians. Sanyoto
introduces Cameron to SAMUEL QUIKO, the band leader, noting that he had
been active in the struggle for independence. Cameron mentions the
meeting to Julia, but dismisses her suggestion to interview Samuel, as a
"guy who plays music for seniors" would not be relevant to their
investigation. Julia is annoyed and interviews Samuel herself. He tells
Julia that his people, the Mardijkers, who were slaves freed during the
17th century and relocated to Kampung Tugu on the outskirts of Jakarta,
had been persecuted by youth militias as "brown Dutchmen" during the
Bersiap disturbances of **1945**. Samuel had secured protection for the
Mardijkers by making a deal with a *preman* leader to use his ability,
as a keroncong musician, to travel freely through both Dutch and
Republican districts of Batavia to transport contraband, propaganda
leaflets, and secret messages under the noses of Dutch street patrols.

Samuel and his band also provided music for gatherings at an artistic
salon hosted by Emeria Soenassa. This second mention sparks Julia's
curiosity. Julia finds many references to Emeria in Dutch-language press
of the period, introducing her to a charismatic, highly intelligent
figure, the first female Indonesian painter of modern art. From **1946**
until independence, her salon been the venue where Dutch and Indonesian
artists and art-lovers met and debated as equals.

During his tenure in the Air Force, Muharto had been constantly at odds
with SOERJADI SOERJADARMA. Muharto had joined the Air Force to fly, but
Soerjadarma believed that the Dutch-educated, multilingual Muharto was
most useful in an administrative position. Freeberg, Fowler, and Cobley
also had their run-ins with Soerjadarma, as he insisted on treating them
as active-duty military officers under his direct command, not as
independent civilian aviation-service providers. But Fowler and Cobley
were contracted to other government agencies; so Soerjadarma took out
his frustrations on Freeberg, the only one working directly for the Air
Force.

Julia's father, COLONEL EDDY, disapproves of her relationship with a
Harley-riding foreigner with a sketchy job and big dreams. Eddy promises
send Julia to postgraduate school in Germany, though Julia knows would
be impossible on his military income. But an arranged date with the son
of a family friend leads Julia to suspect that their respective fathers
are cooking up a corrupt business deal.

Oblique, ambiguous comments in interviews and historical accounts
convince Muharto and Cameron that in **1948** Spoor had been plotting
with the American consul-general and an agent of the newly formed CIA to
foment a military coup to forestall an inevitable handover of the
Netherlands East Indies to the Indonesians. Muharto agrees
wholeheartedly with Cameron. Muharto had suspected many senior Air Force
officers of being clandestine communists attempting to undermine the
nationalist Republican leaders. Breaking the story of an attempted
CIA-driven regime change to prevent a communist takeover a decade before
Vietnam would be Cameron's ticket to a high-profile journalistic career.
Cameron and Muharto descend into a conspiracy rabbit hole, with each new
discovery selectively interpreted to support their conjecture.

In **April 1948**, Soerjadarma orders Freeberg to transport tons of
opium to Bukittinggi. Though, in the eyes of the Republic, this was the
legitimate relocation of a controlled substance from one government
facility to another, if intercepted the Dutch would regard Freeberg as a
narcotics smuggler and jail him for life. But Freeberg had no choice:
the Republic owned him large amounts, which he might never see if he
were to start refusing missions. His other business venture,
Southeastern Airlines, was failing to take off, so to speak, and
Freeberg was in danger of losing his investment.

Julia discovers that Muharto had been the commanding officer of a
CIA-sponsored air force during the Permesta rebellion of **1957**. Julia
suspects that Muharto revealing a CIA-sponsored coup in Batavia would
atone for his activities as rebel commander a decade later, and so was
pushing the conspiracy theory. Julia's own research suggests that
Spoor's secretive meetings with American officials actually were to
share information about possible gunrunning by corrupt KNIL officers.

Colonel Eddy repeats his offer to fund Julia's post-graduate studies in
Germany. Julia demands to know the source of the money. Eddy admits to a
benign form of corruption: providing potential foreign investors with
non-classified information gained from the military intelligence
network.

An interview with Emeria's teenage housekeeper, now an artist herself,
reveals that Victor and Emeria had been lovers. Julia confronts Victor
with this information, who then confesses that he actually had defected
to the Republican guerrilla forces in **December 1948** on the promise
that Emeria would join him, but he had not seen her again. Julia learns
that Emeria had returned to Indonesia a few years previously, and tracks
her down in a village near Jogjakarta, where she teaches art to
children. In **1950** Emeria had been granted a "colonial guilt"
scholarship to study in the Netherlands for a year, but had met and
married a Dutch academic and settled in Europe, returning only after her
husband's death. Emeria regrets her decision to abandon Indonesia, but
had been drawn to the promise of a stimulating life in Europe as an
artist and the wife of a prominent college professor.

Samuel Quiko reveals to Julia that he had been an unwitting courier
between rogue KNIL officers and communist agents in the Republican
military. He would carry messages by pasting them between pages in a
song book, and would often glance at the contents. One message in
**September 1948** was the flight itinerary of RI-002 that would
transport gold to Sumatra.

Julia finds a photograph of RI-002 guarded by a Dutch soldier. Based on
the surrounding landscape, Muharto believes the airstrip to be
Karangendah, where Freeberg had made a test landing in **1947**. To
confirm this, Cameron asks Syd to fill in for him at the Jakarta Times,
and flies to nearby Palembang, carrying a note of introduction from
Sanyoto to ANWAR CONGO, a local preman leader who Sanyoto had used in
his days as a fixer. Cameron is denied access to the former Air Force
base, now an Army tank-training ground. Anwar Congo helps Cameron sneak
into the base and take photographs. Later, Anwar reveals that he had
organized the clandestine shipment of guns purchased with gold bullion
by KNIL officers to Java in **October 1948**, a few days after RI-002
had vanished. This suggests that rogue KNIL officers had intercepted
RI-002 and taken the gold.

Cameron returns to Jakarta to find that Syd had suffered a fatal stroke
while working his double shift. As he breaks the news to Julia, he also
admits that she was right all along about the "CIA coup". Colonel Eddy
suddenly appears, and informs Cameron that he had been spotted at
Karangendah and will be arrested for spying. However, Eddy has delayed
the paperwork, giving Cameron the few hours he needs to leave Indonesia.
At the airport, Cameron promises to relocate to wherever Julia decides
to attend graduate school. But with Emeria's regret at abandoning her
homeland, and the likelihood that Freeberg had lost his life due to
military corruption fresh in her mind, Julia informs Cameron and her
father that she has decided to further her studies in Indonesia.
