**27 September 1988 - Jakarta Post** Cameron, an American journalism
graduate doing a year's internship as a copy editor The Jakarta Post, an
English-language daily newspaper, pitches a story idea to managing
editor Sabam Siagian. Sabam rolls his eyes and explains, yet again,
that, under the rules set down by the government,non-Indonesian newsroom
staff cannot do actual reporting. Then Sabam relaxes his gruff demeanor
and tells Cameron he can interview his old friend former Air Force
officer Petit Muharto about his experiences during the post-war struggle
against the Dutch. This is a feature, not news, and anyway, says Sabam
"No one else has time."

**28 September 1988 - Muharto Residence** Petit Muharto, a lively,
dapper Indonesian in his late 60s, is sitting with his wife Ani in their
cosy living room in the Jakarta suburbs when they hear the roar of a
large motorcycle approaching. Muharto, in jest, covers his ears, and is
then surprised when the motorcycle stops in front of their house. A
moment later, there is a knock on the door. Ani opens it to find
Cameron, in jeans and motorcycle boots, asking for Muharto. Once over
his surprise at being interviewed by a "Hell's Angel" Muharto tells the
story of the Bob Freeberg and RI-002, beginning with a surprise call he
received a his desk in Maguwo Air Base in Jogjakarta.

**7 June 1947 - Maguwo** Muharto receives a telephone call from an army
base in Tasikmalaya, reporting that a foreign pilot has landed on a
remote beach nearby and asked for Muharto by name.

Muharto reports the surprising call to Suryadarma, the commander of the
Air Force. Suryadarma grins, saying: "Must be one of your foreign flyboy
friends", and sends Muharto to Tasik to investigate.

Flying to Tasik in a refurbished Japanese aircraft, whose pilot had only
first seen an airplane a few months previously, Muharto takes his mind
from possible catastrophe by recollecting his experiences during his
blockade runs three months previously, wondering which pilot it might
be. On the third blockade run, with Bob Freeberg as captain, the
overcast sky forces Muharto to navigate by asking Bob to fly low enough
to follow the railway line to Jogja. The Nikosoren lands in Tasik.
Muharto is met by Pang, and army lieutenant who had called him, and
reveals that his commander thought Freeberg was a spy and wanted to
shoot him. They load up a jeep with two barrels of aviation fuel and
drive to the beach. Muharto receives a telephone call from an army base
in Tasikmalaya, reporting that a foreign pilot has landed on a remote
beach nearby and asked for Muharto by name.

**8 June 1947 - Cikolong** Muharto and Pang arrive at Cikolong beach. As
soon as Muharto sees the beach, bookended by two rivers and the gap
between the water and palm trees scarcely more than the Dakota's wing
span, he knew that, of all the pilots he had met, only Bob Freeberg had
the skill to make that landing.

**9 June 1947 - Maguwo** In Jogja, Suradarma commissions Bob to fly a
cargo valuable quinine to Manila and return with medicine and other
goods. To forestall possible problems with authorities in Manila Muharto
suggests that they paint a registration number, RI-002, on the
unregistered war-surplus Dakota.

**20 June 1947 - Manila Courtroom** Bob and Muharto attend their first
court session to decide who owns Dutch representatives take them to
court over possession of the quinine cargo.

**August 1947 - Madras Curry** As they wait for a buyer for the quinine
Muharto, Boedi, and Pang eat one meal a day at a Indian restaurant. On
most days Bob joins them and pays for all, inisting that he is
responsible for their well-being until he returns them to Java.

**October 1947 - Jogja Palace** Muharto takes Bob to meet Soekarno . At
the presidential palace. As was his custom in private conversation,
Soekarno treats Bob as an equal and urges him to stay and help the
struggle.

**30 November 1947 - RI-002** Freeberg, Muharto and Boedi fly Republican
economists and other experts to Manila to meet with United Nations
representatives in the hill town of Baguio. The delegates, who are all
prominent figures in the Republic and have cosmopolitan backgrounds,
treat Bob with as much respect as do the hero-worshipping common people
of Jogja.

**May 1948 - Maguwo** Suryadarma promotes Muharto to major and assigns
him to desk duties at Maguwo.

**28 September 1988 - Muharto** Tthree weeks before the wedding Muharto
is devastated to learn that RI-002 is missing.

**29 July 1977 - Teluk Betulu Air Force base** In an otherwise empty
hanger, five coffins draped in Indonesian flags lay on a platform. A
sixth coffin, larger than the rest and without a flag, rests on a
separate platform. A flatbed truck pulls into the hanger and a squad of
airmen, in silence, pick up each of the coffins and place them on the
truck. But they leave the sixth coffin where it lies as the truck pulls
away.

**19 April 1977 - Punggur** An Air Force team investigating the crash
site find a few human remains, confirmation that it was RI-002, but no
sign of the gold cargo.

**28 September 1988 - Muharto Residence** Muharto explains that he
became aware of the discovery of the crash site, wholly by accident,
some five years previously. He wrote to his contacts in the Air Force
and to the officers who participated in the crash-site investigation,
but received vague, non-committal replies --- or only silence.

**28 September 1988 - Muharto Residence** Muharto tells Cameron that the
sixth coffin, presumably containing Bob's remains, could not be buried
with the others as a foreigner cannot be interred in a cemetery for
national heroes, however much he may deserve the honor himself through
his services to the nation.

Muharto's expression as he finished his reminiscences convinces Cameron
that he regarded Freeberg as a close friend, and is seeking closure
about his mysterious disappearance. Muharto wonders that if he had
turned down promotion and had been with Bob on the final flight, maybe
it would not have ended in tragedy.

**29 September 1988 - Jakarta Post** Cameron gives a draft of the
Muharto interview to Sabam. He glances at it, then hands it to Syd, then
heads out the door to a dinner party. Syd reads the piece, and says it
needs a photo of Freeberg himself, not just the generic photos that
Muharto gave him. Syd suggests that Cameron try the Indonesian Photo
Agency, IPPHOS, who have an extensive collection of images from the
period. An old Dutch-born photojournalist, Victor, looks after the
place. "He will know", Syd says. "He has, literally, a 'photographic
memory'".

**29 September 1988 - IPPHOS** Cameron walks into IPPHOS office, a
ramshackle collection of photgraphs and filing cabinets housed in a
colonial-era building one government inspection away from condemnation.
Inside is an elderly white person who, indeed, is Victor. Syd had been
correct in his assessment. When Cameron makes his request, Victor goes
straight to a filing cabinent, pulls out a drawer, and retrieves a
photograph of Freeberg, dressed in greasy mechanic's overalls, speaking
with Suryadarma on the Maguwo tarmac.

Cameron asks the fee for using the photograpy. Victor replies "two
coffees" and points to a warung on the sidewalk. Cameron shrugs, buys
the coffees, returns, and sits a table with Victor.

He tells Cameron to give his regards to Syd, and then asks for more
details about the Muharto interview. Cameron recaps, and ends by
repeating Muharto's suspicion that much remains to be discovered. Victor
says: "Of course. Spoor was behind it all. He hated Freeberg with an
all-consuming passion."

**3 October 1988 - Jakarta Post** Cameron puts down the phone, grins,
and says to Muharto: "I'm in!" Muharto is delighted. He suggests they
first visit Boediardjo, the radio operator on RI-002.

**October 1988 - Boedi** Muharto takes Cameron to interview Boediardjo,
the RI-002 radio operation who would rise through the ranks to Air
Marshall and then Minister of Information and an Ambassador in civilian
life. Muharto and Boedi goad each other on amusing tales of living on
cheap curry while stranded in Manila. Then Boediardjo tells of RI-002
missions that Muharto did not participate in.

**17 October 1947 - RI002** Bob drops paratroopers into the Kalimantan
forest. This is the first time in an aircraft for all, so Bob gives a
pep talk to the terrified troopers, translated by Boedi.

**October 1947 - Bangkok** Bob flies two Indonesian aviators to Bangkok,
who will purchase RI-003 and fly it back to Jogja. Bob is detained by
Thai authorities at the insistence of Dutch diplomats, but is released
soon afterward in a tacit recognition of the legitimacy of the new
Republic of Indonesia.

**November 1947 - Hotel Merdeka** On the day the GOC members leave
Jogja, Bob invites Boedi and Muharto to join him for dinner at the Hotel
Merdeka. He is embarrassed when a waiter insists he be served the last
can of American corned beef left behind by visiting United Nations
officials.

**30 November 1947 - RI-002** Freeberg, Muharto and Boedi fly Republican
economists and other experts to Manila to meet with United Nations
representatives in the hill town of Baguio. The delegates, who are all
prominent figures in the Republic and have cosmopolitan backgrounds,
treat Bob with as much respect as do the hero-worshipping common people
of Jogja.

**June 1948 - RI-002** Soekarno gives a speech near where RI-002 had
landed. Soekarno points to Bob resting in the shade with Boedi under a
wing and says: "Here is a foreigner, but he is on our side." During the
Soekarno Tour, Bob refuses Soekarno's order to land on what Bob judged
to be an unsafe runway. Soekarno insists, saying: "To as I say. I'm the
president!" Bob replies, in a measured tone: "Indeed, sir. Down there
you are the president. But up here, I'm the captain."

**October 1988 - Library** Cameron visits the National Library. Using
his Jakarta Post credentials, he is admitted to the limited-access
reference section, an archive of publications and books dating back to
colonial times. The attendant on duty is Julia, an attractive, bookish
Indonesian woman in her early twenties. She demonstrates an impressive
competence when he gives her the list of documents from Sabam. Julia
disappears into the stacks and reappears almost immediately with an
armload of binders and books, which she dumps on the reading table. As
Cameron starts to read, Julia offers to translate any Dutch language
clippings.

**October 1988 - library canteen** At noon, Cameron is only halfway
through the pile of clippings. He asks Julia where he might get some
lunch. Julia invites Cameron to join her in the library canteen. Julia
asks Cameron about how he likes living in Indonesia. Cameron replies
that he is adjusting well, except for one annoying habit. Indonesians
ask how old he is, where he is from, and whether he is married. Cameron
says that this is too personal to discuss with some random stranger.
Julia replies that Indonesians consider such inquiries to be meaningless
pleasantries, like "How are you", or "What's new". She then assures
Cameron: Don't worry, I won't bother you. If I want to know anything
I'll just ask my dad\". At Cameron's quizzical look, Julia smiles and
explains that her father is a general with the the Army's Intel section.
Though Julia is plainly teasing him, Cameron nonetheless gulps down
coffee and says he should get back to work.

**October 1947 - Marketplace Jogja** Affandi has set up his easel in a
marketplace. The only food on display is withered vegetables, rotten
casava, and a single, scrawny chicken. The vendors are dressed in rags.
Affandi paints in his expressionistic style, with vibrant colors and
distorted figures. One young man becomes enraged at seeing the artist,
takes some mud and throws it at the canvas, shouting: "It's bad enough
you draw us when we are clothed only in rags. But you make a lousy
painting we can't understand!"

**16 October 1988 - Affandi Museum Jogjakarta** Affandi dashes off and
signs a self-portrait for Cameron to give to Boedi. Affandi sketches Bob
in front of RI-002. Villagers wearing rags that are literally falling
off their bodies appear in the forest and dig up the propaganda posters
and paintings buried there. The cut and fashion them into garments,
proudly wearing new pants and shirts lurid with colorful images. Cameron
meets Affandi, who tells him amusing stories of making propaganda
posters to raise morale during the blockade.

**October 1988 - Merapi** Cameron accompanies Muharto to a village on
the upper slopes of the Merapi volcano to meet Muharto's spiritual
advisor, Mbah Maridjan. The three hike the steep incline to a shrine,
effortlessly in the case of the sexagenarian duo, but with some
difficulty by their companion, some four decades their junior. Cameron
watches respectfully as the two intone Islamic prayers, then lay
Hindu-style floral offerings at the shrine to the gods of the fire
mountain.

**16 October 1988 - Museum** Muharto takes Cameron to the Air Force
museum in Jogja, a re-purposed hanger filled with decommissioned
aircraft and other exhibits, which stir evoke vivid memories of the role
of the Air Force in the struggle for independence. In the curator's
office, Muharto handles the dynamo with the bullet lodged in the
windings, and has a mystical vision of RI-002 in the seconds before the
crash.

**10 July 1947 - RI002** Bob invites Muharto to sit in co-pilot seat and
assist him with the flap controls during the final approach to Manila.
But when Bob gives the command, the nervous Muharto pushed the levers to
the full causing the Dakota to make a dramatic drop. Bob instantly
repositions the levers, and gently reminds Muharto to not pass the
half-flaps setting until they see the runway.

**August 1947 - ABBar** Bob Walters complains to Boedi about his
business dealings with Bob Freeberg.

**September 1947 - Madras Curry Manila** Muharto attempts to pay for
their meals at Madras Curry, explaining that it is an honorarium for the
talk to the lady lawyers. To his surprise, Bob chastises him for "taking
money for nothing".

**June 1947 - Batavia** Attends art exhibitions and takes photographs of
event. One of other guests talks to him and hears astute art criticism,
so suggests he write up reviews and so sell his photos to the
newspapers. He does this several times, and also does good photos of
street life.

**August 1947 - Emeria Studio** Victor meets Emeria at her studio.
