• date: 26 September 1988 • location: Jakarta Post Newsroom

Cameron, an American in his mid 20s, stands at the desk of a middle-aged
Indonesian man sitting at a desk in the Jakarta Post newsroom. Cameron
points to a sheet of paper on the desk and lectures the older man in a
condescending manner about mistakes in English grammar. Sabam Siagian, a
distinguished Indonesian middle-aged man wearing a freshly pressed
Safari suit, walks past, seeing the annoyance on the reporter's face.
Cameron sees Sabam and follows him into his office. Inside the cramped
office,

Sabam sits at a desk, almost disappearing behind precariously balanced
piles of folders and documents and starts searching for something.
Cameron tries to pitch a story idea, but Sabam waves him off, reminding
the American that he is a foreigner working in a technical capacity, and
not an accredited correspondent. The government is very strict on this
matter, he says. Then, Sabam relents, looks through his papers, and
pulls out a card, handing it to Cameron. He explains that his old
friend, Petit Muharto Kartodirdjo, a former Air Force officer, has an
interesting story to tell about an American blockade runner who
mysteriously vanished on 1 October 1948. The coming Saturday will make
the 40-year anniversary of the disappearance. Since this is only a
feature story in a weekend edition about a historical incident, there is
no harm in letting Cameron do the interview. Besides, Sabam continues,
no one else has time to spare. • date: 28 September 1988 • location:
Muharto living room

Cameron meets Petit Muharto at his cozy, tidy residence in a Jakarta
suburb. Muharto tells Cameron that he had been the co-pilot of RI-002, a
cargo plane chartered by the Indonesian Air Force to run the blockade
around the Republican territories set up by the Dutch. Muharto starts
his story with the account of a surprise telephone call he received at
his desk at Indonesian air force headquarters in Jogjakarta.

1.  Bob gets job with CALI. immediately after arriving in Manila.

2.  Bob learns SE Airlines has been dissolved.

3.  Bob partners with Singapore based expat to start Southeastern
    Airlines

4.  3.  Bob sets up Southeastern Airlines. Recruits indolent expat to
        set up Southeastern Airlines.

5.  As Bob is now a businessman, not just a cargo pilot, orders suits to
    look presentable at meetings.

6.  For his oversized frame is a running gag. Not possible to get his
    size in Manila in 1947.

7.  Tom Lee tells Bob suits have probably been stolen

8.  Bob sues in court to force Walters to make a deal. Walters refuses.

9.  Salipada Penatun offers to have Walters deported. Tom Lee talks Bob
    out of it. Bob learns Singapore company has failed. Partners decided
    not to trust him after being badmouthed by Bob Walters.

10. Bob returns from third CALI flight to find plane missing

11. Asks around. Other pilot in bar gives him location

12. Freeberg and Walters partner to buy war surplus Dakota

in a cramped bungalow at Maguwo Air Base in Jogjakarta. An airman
approaches his desk and speaks (without saluting first) that he someone
wants to speak to him on the telephone. Muharto looks surprised, stands
and walks to a neighboring office, where the only telephone in the
building is kept. He listens intently, discerning only a few words
through the crackle of static: "Tasikmalaya base", "Foreign pilot",
"Captain Petit Muharto". Muharto walks to another building, to the
office of Suryadarma, the commander of the Air Force. Muharto explains
that an officer at the Tasik army base had reported an unknown cargo
plane making an emergency landing on a nearby beach, and that the
foreign pilot had spoken his name. Suryadarma grins, saying: "Must be
one of your foreign flyboy friends", and sends Muharto to Tasik to
investigate. Muharto finds Bob in detention at the army based in Tasik.
He convinces the army officers that Bob is not a Dutch aviator, which
saves him from being shot.

Muharto tells Cameron that he flew to Tasik in a powerful, open-cockpit
monoplane flown by a pilot barely out of his teens and who had not even
seen an airplane until the previous year. During the 30-minute flight,
Muharto pondered who the American pilot might be, and decided it must be
Bob Freeberg. He remembered meeting Freeberg two months before when he
accompanied the third blockade run he had organized with the
Manilia-based CALI charter airline.

1.  Bob gets job with CALI. immediately after arriving in Manila.

2.  Bob learns SE Airlines has been dissolved.

3.  Bob partners with Singapore based expat to start Southeastern
    Airlines

4.  3.  Bob sets up Southeastern Airlines. Recruits indolent expat to
        set up Southeastern Airlines.

5.  As Bob is now a businessman, not just a cargo pilot, orders suits to
    look presentable at meetings.

6.  For his oversized frame is a running gag. Not possible to get his
    size in Manila in 1947.

7.  Tom Lee tells Bob suits have probably been stolen

8.  Bob sues in court to force Walters to make a deal. Walters refuses.

9.  Salipada Penatun offers to have Walters deported. Tom Lee talks Bob
    out of it. Bob learns Singapore company has failed. Partners decided
    not to trust him after being badmouthed by Bob Walters.

10. Bob returns from third CALI flight to find plane missing

11. Asks around. Other pilot in bar gives him location

12. Freeberg and Walters partner to buy war surplus Dakota

between Bob and his co-pilot, guiding the aircraft by landmarks he has
seen twice before on previous blockade runs. But today, overcast
obscures the terrain save tops of the volcanoes poking through the
clouds. Miss Brown, a comely Filipina who, incongruously, is the
stewardess on what is basically an illegal flight, hands Muharto a cup
of tea, then looks at the solid overcast with obvious concern.

Bob points to the peaks and asks if there is any high ground in between.
Muharto thinks for a moment, then replies: I don't think so. Nothing
about a few hundred meters. To Muharto's horror, Bob noses the aircraft
down through the overcast, emerging perilously close to the terrain.
Muharto gulps, and frantically looks for any type of landmark. He sees a
rail line that he knows will be flat all the way to Jogja. He tells Bob
to follow that line, and Jogja appears a few minutes later, to Miss
Brown's great relief.

As the aircraft is being unloaded and refueled for the return to
Singapore, Muharto introduces Bob to Suryadarma, who thanks him for his
assistance. Then Suryadarma takes Muharto aside and tells him that this
will be his last blockade run. An Indian businessman has offered to link
India with the Republic with his own Dakota, VT-CLA, and has the full
support of the Indian government.

Muharto tells Cameron that he was both pleased at this display of
crucial international support, and dismayed that once again he will be
desk-bound. However, thanks to Bob, his last flight will be a memorable
one.

Before takeoff on the return trip to Singapore, Muharto asks Bob if he
can attempt a landing on a refurbished Japanese airstrip at Karenengah.
Bob readily agrees. They circle the strip and Bob ponders the attempt.
Muharto asks if he can land a plane this size. Bob replies that he did
this all the time in the war. He can "land on a dime and give you a
nickel change." Then Muharto asks if he can take off again. Bob replies:
"I certainly hope so. We see to be smack dab in the middle of nowhere."
Bob lands. and Santoso, the base commander climbs aboard to meet them.
Santoso leaves the plane, and Bob takes off, leaving the ground a few
meters before the end of the runway.

Muharto tells Cameron that the takeoff was indeed successful, and they
set a course for the highland town of Bukittinggi, where two army
engineers will recruit local villagers to recommission a wartime
airfield.

The CALI Dakota flies over the Bukit Barisan mountaintops, and drops
into a valley toward the town of Bukittinggi. At Muharto's direction,
Bob passes low over an airstrip, which is plainly full of potholes and
unusable. The co-pilot leaves his seat and goes to the cargo
compartment, motioning to Miss Brown and Muharto to sit down far from
the door. The two other passengers are donning parachutes and preparing
to jump. The co-pilot wrenches open the door, and scraps of paper and
cardboard swirl as the air stream enters the cabin. The two parachutists
jump out the door, and are seen landing squarely on the airstrip.

In Singapore, Muharto and Bob part ways: Muharto back to a desk job, Bob
to quit CALI and start his own company. Muharto tells Cameron that he
had no idea they would meet again, and in such a surprising manner.

Muharto tells Cameron that in Tasik he met Pang Soeparto, the junior
army officer who telephoned him, who takes him (and two barrels of
aviation fuel) to the beach at Cikolong. He tells Cameron that as soon
as he saw the beach, bookended by two rivers and scarcely the gap
between the water and palm trees scarcely more than the Dakota's wing
span, he knew that, of all the pilots he had met, only Bob Freeberg had
the skill to make that landing.

As Muharto and Pang walk over the soft sand toward the Dakota, Muharto
can see that he was correct. It is Bob Freeberg, who is digging the sand
from around one of the wheels. Muharto sees that the Dakota is undamaged
but stuck in the soft sand. They first try to fashion a runway from
coconut fronds, but the leaves disintegrated under the wheels of the
heavy Dakota. But this time hundreds of villagers had arrived to witness
the outlandish spectacle. Muharto looks around the village, and notices
that most houses have walls of bamboo woven bamboo. He gets an idea,
climbs with Bob onto the wing of the Dakota, and launches into an
impassioned speech saying that this brave foreign is our friend and will
help us drive the despised Dutch from our land. The villagers cheer, and
Muharto is joined by Pang, the army officer, who tells the assembled
crowd to, literally, tear their own houses apart to lay the

1.  Bob gets job with CALI. immediately after arriving in Manila.

2.  Bob learns SE Airlines has been dissolved.

3.  Bob partners with Singapore based expat to start Southeastern
    Airlines

4.  3.  Bob sets up Southeastern Airlines. Recruits indolent expat to
        set up Southeastern Airlines.

5.  As Bob is now a businessman, not just a cargo pilot, orders suits to
    look presentable at meetings.

6.  For his oversized frame is a running gag. Not possible to get his
    size in Manila in 1947.

7.  Tom Lee tells Bob suits have probably been stolen

8.  Bob sues in court to force Walters to make a deal. Walters refuses.

9.  Salipada Penatun offers to have Walters deported. Tom Lee talks Bob
    out of it. Bob learns Singapore company has failed. Partners decided
    not to trust him after being badmouthed by Bob Walters.

10. Bob returns from third CALI flight to find plane missing

11. Asks around. Other pilot in bar gives him location

12. Freeberg and Walters partner to buy war surplus Dakota

on the sand. A few hours later, the Dakota, which Muharto on board,
takes off and flies away.

The Dakota lands in Jogjakarta, where Suryadarma

1.  Bob gets job with CALI. immediately after arriving in Manila.

2.  Bob learns SE Airlines has been dissolved.

3.  Bob partners with Singapore based expat to start Southeastern
    Airlines

4.  3.  Bob sets up Southeastern Airlines. Recruits indolent expat to
        set up Southeastern Airlines.

5.  As Bob is now a businessman, not just a cargo pilot, orders suits to
    look presentable at meetings.

6.  For his oversized frame is a running gag. Not possible to get his
    size in Manila in 1947.

7.  Tom Lee tells Bob suits have probably been stolen

8.  Bob sues in court to force Walters to make a deal. Walters refuses.

9.  Salipada Penatun offers to have Walters deported. Tom Lee talks Bob
    out of it. Bob learns Singapore company has failed. Partners decided
    not to trust him after being badmouthed by Bob Walters.

10. Bob returns from third CALI flight to find plane missing

11. Asks around. Other pilot in bar gives him location

12. Freeberg and Walters partner to buy war surplus Dakota

to fly a cargo of high-value quinine to Manila and return with essential
medicines and spare parts. The war-surplus Dakota is still unregistered,
so to forestall potential problems with Philippine authorities, Muharto
suggests that the designation RI-002 be painted on the tail. Bob
protests that since his is the first aircraft registered by Indonesia,
it should be RI-001. Suryadarma explains the RI-001 is being held in
reserve for a future presidential aircraft, which cannot be owned by a
foreigner.

Muharto tells Cameron that in Manila, they had to fight the Dutch for
possession of the quinine cargo.

Bob and Muharto attend their first court session to decide who owns
Dutch representatives take them to court over possession of the quinine
cargo. Their lawyer, Salipada Penatun, who is also a sitting senator
with extensive high-level contacts, lays out the legal justification for
ownership of the quinine, then let's Muharto give an impassioned plea,
claiming that the money from selling the quinine will buy medicines and
other essentials unavailable in the besieged capital. The Dutch counter
by calling a plantation expert to testify that the Republic does not
have the capability to process quinine, so the drug must have been
produced in a Dutch-owed factory before the war. Muharto jumps to his
feet, ready to protest this insult to his people's technological skill,
but Penatun motions for him to sit down, then calmly tells the judge: "A
foreigner is not qualified to discuss the internal matters of the
sovereign Republic of Indonesia." The judge considers this, obviously
with some sympathy, and adjourns the session.

Muharto tells Cameron that while they waited for the court verdict, Bob
took full responsibility for their welfare, renting a room and buying
meals of cheap curry. After six weeks of waiting, they were overjoyed
when the court ruled in they favor. But later that day they listened in
horror to a shortwave news broadcast.

Bob, Muharto and Boedi listen in horror to shortwave radio reports that
the blockade runner that Suryadarma had chartered had been shot down on
approach to Maguwo. Muharto turns to Bob and asks if he is still willing
to aid the Republic by flying through the blockade at the risk of being
shot down. Bob nods.

Muharto tells Cameron that along the quinine was theirs to sell, they
have difficulty finding a buyer. So as they waited, Muharto made himself
useful by promoting the Republican cause among university students and
other groups. He also acted as unofficial Military liaison with the
Philippines army, he counterpart being Major Primitivo. He assigned one
of his officers, Captain Ignatio Espina, an experienced commando, to
return to Java on a clandestine mission to train our youth militia.

They finally found a buyer in mid-September, and on 21 September 1947,
with with Captain Espina on board, RI-002 finally left Manila.

• 21 September 1947 • RI-002 cockpit in flight

RI-002 flies between the volcanic peaks of Java, which throw ominous
shadows over the land in as the sun sets. Since the presence of Captain
Espina could not be revealed, RI-002 was forced to fly non-stop from
Manila, extending the range with a spare fuel tank installed in the
cargo hold. That was now empty, as well as the wing tanks. Freeberg asks
Muharto to identify landmarks with increasing urgency. Muharto peers out
the window, unsure of what can barely make out in the gathering gloom.
Finally, Freeberg almost shouts: "Dammit Muharto! Where are we? You
should know! This is your country!"

A nervous laugh escapes Muharto's lips, as usual for an embarrassed
Javanese person. Muharto looks out the cockpit window again, and again
laughs, this time in delight at a schoolboy memory. Muharto has spotted
a line of low, rounded hills that he and his school mates called,
naturally, the "Susu Seribu", the Thousand Breasts. With this vivid
memory trigger Muharto can clearly visualize the relevant page in his
school atlas. Now with authority in his voice, he tells Freeberg: "Fly
toward those hills, turn to the west and follow them until the last one,
then turn back north and fly for 30 kilometers." A few minutes later,
RI-002 lands in Maguwo, the engines sputtering to a halt as it rolls
along the runway.

Muharto tells Cameron that for the next year, Bob provided the
indispensable link between the Republic of Indonesia and the world.
Muharto says that he was co-pilot on RI-002 for many missions until May
1948, when he was promoted to Major and assigned permanently to head
quarters. Four months later, and seven weeks before Bob was to be guest
of honor at Muharto's wedding, RI-002 vanished while transporting a
quarter ton of gold to safety in Bukittinggi.

Muharto explains that nothing was known of the crash, and the Dutch
authorities denied all knowledge. In April 1979, Muharto says, farmers
searching the remote mountainside for new land stumble across the
wreckage of an aircraft.

• date: April 1977 • location: Mount Punggur

Two wiry men dressed in shabby clothes lead a squad of airmen and their
officer, Lt. Sulaiman, through a forested hillside to the wreckage of
RI-002. The airmen set up camp and search the area. They find fragments
of a wing with the faded letters: RI-00, other airplane parts, including
a dynamo with a bullet wedged between the windings and armature. There
are a few fragments of human remains, which the soldiers reverently dig
from the earth and carefully wrap in cloth. The also find two empty
wooden crates labeled: "Gold", but a through search of the area does not
find any trace of the metal itself.

Muharto says that the recovered remains were buried in the Nation Hero's
Cemetery at the airbase.

• date: 29 July 1977 • location: Teluk Betulu Air Force base

In an otherwise empty hanger, five coffins draped in Indonesian flags
lay on a platform. A sixth coffin, larger than the rest and without a
flag, rests on a separate platform.

Muharto tells Cameron that the sixth coffin, presumably containing Bob's
remains, could not be buried with the others because he was a foreigner.
Muharto explains that he became aware of the discovery of the crash
site, wholly be accident, some five years previously. He wrote his
contacts in the air force and to the officers who participated in the
crash-site investigation, but received only vague, non-committal replies
-- or only silence.

Muharto's expression as he finished his reminiscences convinces Cameron
that he regarded Freeberg as a close friend, and is seeking closure
about his mysterious disappearance. Muharto finishes by saying,
wistfully, that his is sure people know more about the mystery of RI-002
than they are telling. • October 1988 • JP newsroom 1. Sabam tells
Cameron that Muharto liked the write up. 1. Sabam assigns Cameron series
of articles leading up to the

expected in two months. 2. In exchange, asks to be allowed to
investigate Muharto's claims of possible cover up regarding RI-002.

Sabam strides into the newsroom, brandishing a copy of the paper, and
approaches a disheveled, chain-smoking older American sitting at the
desk adjacent to Cameron. Sabam points to an article headlined "Ladyboy
Molested By Sex-Crazed Gang", and says: "This is a family newspaper!".

Sabam then turns to Cameron, still holding the paper, and points to
another page with a photo of Bob Freeberg. He says that Muharto was
delighted with the article. Cameron agrees that was an intriguing story,
and says he would like to do some follow-up research. Sabam nods in
agreement, saying "On your own time, of course" and suggests he start
with a book he had recently stumbled across in the reference section of
the new national library. He writes the name of the book in the margin
of the paper in his hand, leaves it on Cameron's desk, and returns to
his office.

Cameron picks of a copy of the newspaper on his desk, turns a page, and
reads aloud: "And then the rapists took their turns to quench their
unnatural desires with the body of the hapless transvestite
hairdresser." The article carries the byline: "Our Reporter".

Cameron asks how he gets away with it. Syd replies that he and Sabam go
way back. Sabam's biggest worry is that one of you and the other foreign
copy editors are not sufficiently familiar with the fine points of
Indonesian culture and history, and will let something slip through that
will rile some high official. He needs me as the last pair of eyes
before it all goes to press. "Doing proper journalism in Indonesia is
like walking a tightrope," Syd says, "and I'm the balancing pole." Syd
then turns away and takes a metal flask from his desk drawer. There is a
slight tremor in his hand as he pours a splash from the flask into his
coffee, replaces the flask in his desk, and goes back to work.

• date: October 1988 • location: LIbrary Reference Section At the
library, Julia, a grad student working in the reference section,
retrieves the book for Cameron. He is not allowed to take the book from
the reading room, and so stays for several hours, making copious notes
of the Ining invites Muharto and Boedi for drinks in a Philippine Army
dive bar. Ining shows himself to be a party animal, treating drinks and
flirting. But he shows a flash of anger at an imagined slight by another
soldier. Muharto and Boedi have to calm him down. as seen through the
eyes of the author.

☐ Aviation Brotherhood

He asks Julia where he can • October 1988 • Hotel Borobudur

Cameron and Julia walk into the lobby of the Hotel Borobudur together,
where her friends are waiting. Cameron greets them, then walks toward
the bar. Julia's friends grill her about the bule, with Julia insisting
that they are not even friends, just new acquaintances. The friends, who
are all anak jendral, insist that Julia should go out with him. All bule
are rich, they say, and maybe with his money Julia can finally come with
them on shopping trips to Singapore.

. No liquids are allowed the reading room, so Julia says she was just
about to take a break herself, and invites Cameron to join her in the
canteen.

• date: October 1988 • location: library canteen

As Cameron drinks his coffee and Julia her tea, Julia asks Cameron about
how he likes living in Indonesia. Cameron replies that he loves it,
except for one annoying habit. Indonesians always ask how old he is,
where he is from, and whether he is married. Cameron says that this is
too personal to discuss with some random stranger.

Julia replies that Indonesians consider such inquiries to be meaningless
pleasantries, like "How are you", or "What's new". She then assures
Cameron: Don't worry, I won't bother you. If I want to know anything
I'll just ask my dad\".

At Cameron's quizzical look, Julia smiles and explains that her father
is a general with the . Though Julia is plainly teasing him, Cameron
nonetheless gulps down his coffee and says he should get back to work.

• date: 26 September 1988 • location: Jakarta Post Newsroom

Cameron, an American in his mid 20s, stands at the desk of a middle-aged
Indonesian man sitting at a desk in the Jakarta Post newsroom. Cameron
points to a sheet of paper on the desk and lectures the older man in a
condescending manner about mistakes in English grammar. Sabam Siagian, a
distinguished Indonesian middle-aged man wearing a freshly pressed
Safari suit, walks past, seeing the annoyance on the reporter's face.
Cameron sees Sabam and follows him into his office. Inside the cramped
office,

Sabam sits at a desk, almost disappearing behind precariously balanced
piles of folders and documents and starts searching for something.
Cameron tries to pitch a story idea, but Sabam waves him off, reminding
the American that he is a foreigner working in a technical capacity, and
not an accredited correspondent. The government is very strict on this
matter, he says. Then, Sabam relents, looks through his papers, and
pulls out a card, handing it to Cameron. He explains that his old
friend, Petit Muharto Kartodirdjo, a former Air Force officer, has an
interesting story to tell about an American blockade runner who
mysteriously vanished on 1 October 1948. The coming Saturday will make
the 40-year anniversary of the disappearance. Since this is only a
feature story in a weekend edition about a historical incident, there is
no harm in letting Cameron do the interview. Besides, Sabam continues,
no one else has time to spare. • date: 28 September 1988 • location:
Muharto living room

Cameron meets Petit Muharto at his cozy, tidy residence in a Jakarta
suburb. Muharto tells Cameron that he had been the co-pilot of RI-002, a
cargo plane chartered by the Indonesian Air Force to run the blockade
around the Republican territories set up by the Dutch. Muharto starts
his story with the account of a surprise telephone call he received at
his desk at Indonesian air force headquarters in Jogjakarta.

1.  Bob gets job with CALI. immediately after arriving in Manila.

2.  Bob learns SE Airlines has been dissolved.

3.  Bob partners with Singapore based expat to start Southeastern
    Airlines

4.  3.  Bob sets up Southeastern Airlines. Recruits indolent expat to
        set up Southeastern Airlines.

5.  As Bob is now a businessman, not just a cargo pilot, orders suits to
    look presentable at meetings.

6.  For his oversized frame is a running gag. Not possible to get his
    size in Manila in 1947.

7.  Tom Lee tells Bob suits have probably been stolen

8.  Bob sues in court to force Walters to make a deal. Walters refuses.

9.  Salipada Penatun offers to have Walters deported. Tom Lee talks Bob
    out of it. Bob learns Singapore company has failed. Partners decided
    not to trust him after being badmouthed by Bob Walters.

10. Bob returns from third CALI flight to find plane missing

11. Asks around. Other pilot in bar gives him location

12. Freeberg and Walters partner to buy war surplus Dakota

in a cramped bungalow at Maguwo Air Base in Jogjakarta. An airman
approaches his desk and speaks (without saluting first) that he someone
wants to speak to him on the telephone. Muharto looks surprised, stands
and walks to a neighboring office, where the only telephone in the
building is kept. He listens intently, discerning only a few words
through the crackle of static: "Tasikmalaya base", "Foreign pilot",
"Captain Petit Muharto". Muharto walks to another building, to the
office of Suryadarma, the commander of the Air Force. Muharto explains
that an officer at the Tasik army base had reported an unknown cargo
plane making an emergency landing on a nearby beach, and that the
foreign pilot had spoken his name. Suryadarma grins, saying: "Must be
one of your foreign flyboy friends", and sends Muharto to Tasik to
investigate. Muharto finds Bob in detention at the army based in Tasik.
He convinces the army officers that Bob is not a Dutch aviator, which
saves him from being shot.

Muharto tells Cameron that he flew to Tasik in a powerful, open-cockpit
monoplane flown by a pilot barely out of his teens and who had not even
seen an airplane until the previous year. During the 30-minute flight,
Muharto pondered who the American pilot might be, and decided it must be
Bob Freeberg. He remembered meeting Freeberg two months before when he
accompanied the third blockade run he had organized with the
Manilia-based CALI charter airline.

1.  Bob gets job with CALI. immediately after arriving in Manila.

2.  Bob learns SE Airlines has been dissolved.

3.  Bob partners with Singapore based expat to start Southeastern
    Airlines

4.  3.  Bob sets up Southeastern Airlines. Recruits indolent expat to
        set up Southeastern Airlines.

5.  As Bob is now a businessman, not just a cargo pilot, orders suits to
    look presentable at meetings.

6.  For his oversized frame is a running gag. Not possible to get his
    size in Manila in 1947.

7.  Tom Lee tells Bob suits have probably been stolen

8.  Bob sues in court to force Walters to make a deal. Walters refuses.

9.  Salipada Penatun offers to have Walters deported. Tom Lee talks Bob
    out of it. Bob learns Singapore company has failed. Partners decided
    not to trust him after being badmouthed by Bob Walters.

10. Bob returns from third CALI flight to find plane missing

11. Asks around. Other pilot in bar gives him location

12. Freeberg and Walters partner to buy war surplus Dakota

between Bob and his co-pilot, guiding the aircraft by landmarks he has
seen twice before on previous blockade runs. But today, overcast
obscures the terrain save tops of the volcanoes poking through the
clouds. Miss Brown, a comely Filipina who, incongruously, is the
stewardess on what is basically an illegal flight, hands Muharto a cup
of tea, then looks at the solid overcast with obvious concern.

Bob points to the peaks and asks if there is any high ground in between.
Muharto thinks for a moment, then replies: I don't think so. Nothing
about a few hundred meters. To Muharto's horror, Bob noses the aircraft
down through the overcast, emerging perilously close to the terrain.
Muharto gulps, and frantically looks for any type of landmark. He sees a
rail line that he knows will be flat all the way to Jogja. He tells Bob
to follow that line, and Jogja appears a few minutes later, to Miss
Brown's great relief.

As the aircraft is being unloaded and refueled for the return to
Singapore, Muharto introduces Bob to Suryadarma, who thanks him for his
assistance. Then Suryadarma takes Muharto aside and tells him that this
will be his last blockade run. An Indian businessman has offered to link
India with the Republic with his own Dakota, VT-CLA, and has the full
support of the Indian government.

Muharto tells Cameron that he was both pleased at this display of
crucial international support, and dismayed that once again he will be
desk-bound. However, thanks to Bob, his last flight will be a memorable
one.

Before takeoff on the return trip to Singapore, Muharto asks Bob if he
can attempt a landing on a refurbished Japanese airstrip at Karenengah.
Bob readily agrees. They circle the strip and Bob ponders the attempt.
Muharto asks if he can land a plane this size. Bob replies that he did
this all the time in the war. He can "land on a dime and give you a
nickel change." Then Muharto asks if he can take off again. Bob replies:
"I certainly hope so. We see to be smack dab in the middle of nowhere."
Bob lands. and Santoso, the base commander climbs aboard to meet them.
Santoso leaves the plane, and Bob takes off, leaving the ground a few
meters before the end of the runway.

Muharto tells Cameron that the takeoff was indeed successful, and they
set a course for the highland town of Bukittinggi, where two army
engineers will recruit local villagers to recommission a wartime
airfield.

The CALI Dakota flies over the Bukit Barisan mountaintops, and drops
into a valley toward the town of Bukittinggi. At Muharto's direction,
Bob passes low over an airstrip, which is plainly full of potholes and
unusable. The co-pilot leaves his seat and goes to the cargo
compartment, motioning to Miss Brown and Muharto to sit down far from
the door. The two other passengers are donning parachutes and preparing
to jump. The co-pilot wrenches open the door, and scraps of paper and
cardboard swirl as the air stream enters the cabin. The two parachutists
jump out the door, and are seen landing squarely on the airstrip.

In Singapore, Muharto and Bob part ways: Muharto back to a desk job, Bob
to quit CALI and start his own company. Muharto tells Cameron that he
had no idea they would meet again, and in such a surprising manner.

Muharto tells Cameron that in Tasik he met Pang Soeparto, the junior
army officer who telephoned him, who takes him (and two barrels of
aviation fuel) to the beach at Cikolong. He tells Cameron that as soon
as he saw the beach, bookended by two rivers and scarcely the gap
between the water and palm trees scarcely more than the Dakota's wing
span, he knew that, of all the pilots he had met, only Bob Freeberg had
the skill to make that landing.

As Muharto and Pang walk over the soft sand toward the Dakota, Muharto
can see that he was correct. It is Bob Freeberg, who is digging the sand
from around one of the wheels. Muharto sees that the Dakota is undamaged
but stuck in the soft sand. They first try to fashion a runway from
coconut fronds, but the leaves disintegrated under the wheels of the
heavy Dakota. But this time hundreds of villagers had arrived to witness
the outlandish spectacle. Muharto looks around the village, and notices
that most houses have walls of bamboo woven bamboo. He gets an idea,
climbs with Bob onto the wing of the Dakota, and launches into an
impassioned speech saying that this brave foreign is our friend and will
help us drive the despised Dutch from our land. The villagers cheer, and
Muharto is joined by Pang, the army officer, who tells the assembled
crowd to, literally, tear their own houses apart to lay the

1.  Bob gets job with CALI. immediately after arriving in Manila.

2.  Bob learns SE Airlines has been dissolved.

3.  Bob partners with Singapore based expat to start Southeastern
    Airlines

4.  3.  Bob sets up Southeastern Airlines. Recruits indolent expat to
        set up Southeastern Airlines.

5.  As Bob is now a businessman, not just a cargo pilot, orders suits to
    look presentable at meetings.

6.  For his oversized frame is a running gag. Not possible to get his
    size in Manila in 1947.

7.  Tom Lee tells Bob suits have probably been stolen

8.  Bob sues in court to force Walters to make a deal. Walters refuses.

9.  Salipada Penatun offers to have Walters deported. Tom Lee talks Bob
    out of it. Bob learns Singapore company has failed. Partners decided
    not to trust him after being badmouthed by Bob Walters.

10. Bob returns from third CALI flight to find plane missing

11. Asks around. Other pilot in bar gives him location

12. Freeberg and Walters partner to buy war surplus Dakota

on the sand. A few hours later, the Dakota, which Muharto on board,
takes off and flies away.

The Dakota lands in Jogjakarta, where Suryadarma

1.  Bob gets job with CALI. immediately after arriving in Manila.

2.  Bob learns SE Airlines has been dissolved.

3.  Bob partners with Singapore based expat to start Southeastern
    Airlines

4.  3.  Bob sets up Southeastern Airlines. Recruits indolent expat to
        set up Southeastern Airlines.

5.  As Bob is now a businessman, not just a cargo pilot, orders suits to
    look presentable at meetings.

6.  For his oversized frame is a running gag. Not possible to get his
    size in Manila in 1947.

7.  Tom Lee tells Bob suits have probably been stolen

8.  Bob sues in court to force Walters to make a deal. Walters refuses.

9.  Salipada Penatun offers to have Walters deported. Tom Lee talks Bob
    out of it. Bob learns Singapore company has failed. Partners decided
    not to trust him after being badmouthed by Bob Walters.

10. Bob returns from third CALI flight to find plane missing

11. Asks around. Other pilot in bar gives him location

12. Freeberg and Walters partner to buy war surplus Dakota

to fly a cargo of high-value quinine to Manila and return with essential
medicines and spare parts. The war-surplus Dakota is still unregistered,
so to forestall potential problems with Philippine authorities, Muharto
suggests that the designation RI-002 be painted on the tail. Bob
protests that since his is the first aircraft registered by Indonesia,
it should be RI-001. Suryadarma explains the RI-001 is being held in
reserve for a future presidential aircraft, which cannot be owned by a
foreigner.

Muharto tells Cameron that in Manila, they had to fight the Dutch for
possession of the quinine cargo.

Bob and Muharto attend their first court session to decide who owns
Dutch representatives take them to court over possession of the quinine
cargo. Their lawyer, Salipada Penatun, who is also a sitting senator
with extensive high-level contacts, lays out the legal justification for
ownership of the quinine, then let's Muharto give an impassioned plea,
claiming that the money from selling the quinine will buy medicines and
other essentials unavailable in the besieged capital. The Dutch counter
by calling a plantation expert to testify that the Republic does not
have the capability to process quinine, so the drug must have been
produced in a Dutch-owed factory before the war. Muharto jumps to his
feet, ready to protest this insult to his people's technological skill,
but Penatun motions for him to sit down, then calmly tells the judge: "A
foreigner is not qualified to discuss the internal matters of the
sovereign Republic of Indonesia." The judge considers this, obviously
with some sympathy, and adjourns the session.

Muharto tells Cameron that while they waited for the court verdict, Bob
took full responsibility for their welfare, renting a room and buying
meals of cheap curry. After six weeks of waiting, they were overjoyed
when the court ruled in they favor. But later that day they listened in
horror to a shortwave news broadcast.

Bob, Muharto and Boedi listen in horror to shortwave radio reports that
the blockade runner that Suryadarma had chartered had been shot down on
approach to Maguwo. Muharto turns to Bob and asks if he is still willing
to aid the Republic by flying through the blockade at the risk of being
shot down. Bob nods.

Muharto tells Cameron that along the quinine was theirs to sell, they
have difficulty finding a buyer. So as they waited, Muharto made himself
useful by promoting the Republican cause among university students and
other groups. He also acted as unofficial Military liaison with the
Philippines army, he counterpart being Major Primitivo. He assigned one
of his officers, Captain Ignatio Espina, an experienced commando, to
return to Java on a clandestine mission to train our youth militia.

They finally found a buyer in mid-September, and on 21 September 1947,
with with Captain Espina on board, RI-002 finally left Manila.

• 21 September 1947 • RI-002 cockpit in flight

RI-002 flies between the volcanic peaks of Java, which throw ominous
shadows over the land in as the sun sets. Since the presence of Captain
Espina could not be revealed, RI-002 was forced to fly non-stop from
Manila, extending the range with a spare fuel tank installed in the
cargo hold. That was now empty, as well as the wing tanks. Freeberg asks
Muharto to identify landmarks with increasing urgency. Muharto peers out
the window, unsure of what can barely make out in the gathering gloom.
Finally, Freeberg almost shouts: "Dammit Muharto! Where are we? You
should know! This is your country!"

A nervous laugh escapes Muharto's lips, as usual for an embarrassed
Javanese person. Muharto looks out the cockpit window again, and again
laughs, this time in delight at a schoolboy memory. Muharto has spotted
a line of low, rounded hills that he and his school mates called,
naturally, the "Susu Seribu", the Thousand Breasts. With this vivid
memory trigger Muharto can clearly visualize the relevant page in his
school atlas. Now with authority in his voice, he tells Freeberg: "Fly
toward those hills, turn to the west and follow them until the last one,
then turn back north and fly for 30 kilometers." A few minutes later,
RI-002 lands in Maguwo, the engines sputtering to a halt as it rolls
along the runway.

Muharto tells Cameron that for the next year, Bob provided the
indispensable link between the Republic of Indonesia and the world.
Muharto says that he was co-pilot on RI-002 for many missions until May
1948, when he was promoted to Major and assigned permanently to head
quarters. Four months later, and seven weeks before Bob was to be guest
of honor at Muharto's wedding, RI-002 vanished while transporting a
quarter ton of gold to safety in Bukittinggi.

Muharto explains that nothing was known of the crash, and the Dutch
authorities denied all knowledge. In April 1979, Muharto says, farmers
searching the remote mountainside for new land stumble across the
wreckage of an aircraft.

• date: April 1977 • location: Mount Punggur

Two wiry men dressed in shabby clothes lead a squad of airmen and their
officer, Lt. Sulaiman, through a forested hillside to the wreckage of
RI-002. The airmen set up camp and search the area. They find fragments
of a wing with the faded letters: RI-00, other airplane parts, including
a dynamo with a bullet wedged between the windings and armature. There
are a few fragments of human remains, which the soldiers reverently dig
from the earth and carefully wrap in cloth. The also find two empty
wooden crates labeled: "Gold", but a through search of the area does not
find any trace of the metal itself.

Muharto says that the recovered remains were buried in the Nation Hero's
Cemetery at the airbase.

• date: 29 July 1977 • location: Teluk Betulu Air Force base

In an otherwise empty hanger, five coffins draped in Indonesian flags
lay on a platform. A sixth coffin, larger than the rest and without a
flag, rests on a separate platform.

Muharto tells Cameron that the sixth coffin, presumably containing Bob's
remains, could not be buried with the others because he was a foreigner.
Muharto explains that he became aware of the discovery of the crash
site, wholly be accident, some five years previously. He wrote his
contacts in the air force and to the officers who participated in the
crash-site investigation, but received only vague, non-committal replies
-- or only silence.

Muharto's expression as he finished his reminiscences convinces Cameron
that he regarded Freeberg as a close friend, and is seeking closure
about his mysterious disappearance. Muharto finishes by saying,
wistfully, that his is sure people know more about the mystery of RI-002
than they are telling. • October 1988 • JP newsroom 1. Sabam tells
Cameron that Muharto liked the write up. 1. Sabam assigns Cameron series
of articles leading up to the

expected in two months. 2. In exchange, asks to be allowed to
investigate Muharto's claims of possible cover up regarding RI-002.

Sabam strides into the newsroom, brandishing a copy of the paper, and
approaches a disheveled, chain-smoking older American sitting at the
desk adjacent to Cameron. Sabam points to an article headlined "Ladyboy
Molested By Sex-Crazed Gang", and says: "This is a family newspaper!".

Sabam then turns to Cameron, still holding the paper, and points to
another page with a photo of Bob Freeberg. He says that Muharto was
delighted with the article. Cameron agrees that was an intriguing story,
and says he would like to do some follow-up research. Sabam nods in
agreement, saying "On your own time, of course" and suggests he start
with a book he had recently stumbled across in the reference section of
the new national library. He writes the name of the book in the margin
of the paper in his hand, leaves it on Cameron's desk, and returns to
his office.

Cameron picks of a copy of the newspaper on his desk, turns a page, and
reads aloud: "And then the rapists took their turns to quench their
unnatural desires with the body of the hapless transvestite
hairdresser." The article carries the byline: "Our Reporter".

Cameron asks how he gets away with it. Syd replies that he and Sabam go
way back. Sabam's biggest worry is that one of you and the other foreign
copy editors are not sufficiently familiar with the fine points of
Indonesian culture and history, and will let something slip through that
will rile some high official. He needs me as the last pair of eyes
before it all goes to press. "Doing proper journalism in Indonesia is
like walking a tightrope," Syd says, "and I'm the balancing pole." Syd
then turns away and takes a metal flask from his desk drawer. There is a
slight tremor in his hand as he pours a splash from the flask into his
coffee, replaces the flask in his desk, and goes back to work.

• date: October 1988 • location: LIbrary Reference Section At the
library, Julia, a grad student working in the reference section,
retrieves the book for Cameron. He is not allowed to take the book from
the reading room, and so stays for several hours, making copious notes
of the Ining invites Muharto and Boedi for drinks in a Philippine Army
dive bar. Ining shows himself to be a party animal, treating drinks and
flirting. But he shows a flash of anger at an imagined slight by another
soldier. Muharto and Boedi have to calm him down. as seen through the
eyes of the author.

☐ Aviation Brotherhood

He asks Julia where he can • October 1988 • Hotel Borobudur

Cameron and Julia walk into the lobby of the Hotel Borobudur together,
where her friends are waiting. Cameron greets them, then walks toward
the bar. Julia's friends grill her about the bule, with Julia insisting
that they are not even friends, just new acquaintances. The friends, who
are all anak jendral, insist that Julia should go out with him. All bule
are rich, they say, and maybe with his money Julia can finally come with
them on shopping trips to Singapore.

. No liquids are allowed the reading room, so Julia says she was just
about to take a break herself, and invites Cameron to join her in the
canteen.

• date: October 1988 • location: library canteen

As Cameron drinks his coffee and Julia her tea, Julia asks Cameron about
how he likes living in Indonesia. Cameron replies that he loves it,
except for one annoying habit. Indonesians always ask how old he is,
where he is from, and whether he is married. Cameron says that this is
too personal to discuss with some random stranger.

Julia replies that Indonesians consider such inquiries to be meaningless
pleasantries, like "How are you", or "What's new". She then assures
Cameron: Don't worry, I won't bother you. If I want to know anything
I'll just ask my dad\".

At Cameron's quizzical look, Julia smiles and explains that her father
is a general with the . Though Julia is plainly teasing him, Cameron
nonetheless gulps down his coffee and says he should get back to work.

• date: October 1988 • location: Boedi living room

Muharto takes Cameron to interview Boediardjo, the RI-002 radio operator
who shot through the ranks to be appointed Air Force commander and,
after retirement, Minister of Information and Ambassador to Spain.

• date: October 1947 • location: RI-002 in flight Bob drops paratroopers
into a Republican area. It was the first jump for everyone, and many are
terrified. One soldier pulls his ripcord, spilling his parachute on the
deck. He swears it was an accident, but others grip their cords,
possibly ready to do the same. Boedi reports the situation to Bob, who
turns the controls over to Moeljono and goes back to the cargo area.
With Boedi interpreting, he gives the soldiers a pep talk, telling of
his own terror flying in the war. The soldiers all agree to jump. Boedi
watches as the parachutes drift down and are enveloped by the endless
forest.

Boedi tells Cameron that later, Bob discovers that all had been killed
by the Dutch commandos within hours.

At the end of the interview, Cameron compliments Boedi on his taste in
art, particularly the sweeping, vibrant expressionist works covering
much of the wall space in the living room. Boedi is pleased that the
American appreciates Indonesian art. He says that he is great friends
with the artist, Affandi, and suggests Cameron visit Affandi's museum if
he visits Jogjakarta. Muharto tells Cameron that he is planning to go to
Jogja to visit his spiritual advisor, and so they should go together so
he can also visit the Aviation Museum there, where items of RI-002
wreckage are stored.

• date: 16 October 1988 • location: Affandi Museum Jogjakarta

Muharto drops Cameron at the entrance to the Affandi museum, says he
will pick him up again in two hours, then drives away. Affandi, an
animated, disheveled elderly man, is sitting on a bench on the grounds
of the compound, as though he is homeless person seeking rest, not the
owner of the sprawling estate and a fortune in paintings and sculptures.
Affandi greets Cameron pleasantly, in English, and then becomes effusive
when Cameron brings greetings from Boedi. The fall into animated
conversation. Cameron explains the purpose of his visit, and Affandi
launches into a humorous and poignant narrative of painting propaganda
posters amid the privation and danger of besieged Jogjakarta.

Affandi has set up his easel in a marketplace. The only food on display
is withered vegetables, rotten casava, and a single, scrawny chicken.
The vendors are dressed in rags. Affandi paints in his expressionistic
style, with vibrant colors and distorted figures. One young man becomes
enraged at seeing the artist, takes some mud and throws it at the
canvas, shouting: "It's bad enough you draw us when we are clothed only
in rags. But you make a lousy painting we can't understand!"

Affandi tells Cameron that he had met Freeberg on a few occasions when
he was sketching the Maguwo for propaganda posters.

Affandi is sketching at the edge of the runway, near where RI-002 is
parked. Bob walks up to him and compliments the sketch. Affandi, who
speaks some English, asks Bob to briefly pose for him. Affandi was
struck at the immense respect Bob enjoyed from military and government
officials, and the adoration, the outright hero worship, of the common
Indonesians.

Affandi painted Freeberg standing in front of RI-002 as though he were
Bima, a hero in the wayang legends of ancient Java. Freeberg, like Bima,
was tall and imposing, strong and exceptionally skilled. And, like Bima,
Freeberg was modest and unpretentious, a gentle soul in a warrior's
body.

Cameron asks what happened to the painting. Affandi laughs and explains
that he and his friends at buried the propaganda paintings in the forest
when the Dutch overran Jogja. When the Dutch withdrew from Jogja six
months later, they returned to the forest, only to discover that
villagers had dug them up in the meantime.

• date: April 1949 • location: forest outside jogja

Villagers wearing rags that are literally falling off their bodies
appear in the forest and dig up the propaganda posters and paintings
buried there. The cut and fashion them into garments, proudly wearing
new pants and shirts lurid with colorful images.

Muharto reappears, greets Affandi with respect, and tells Cameron it is
time to go. Affandi grabs a sketch pad, dashes off a self-portrait,
signs it, and hands it Cameron, explaining that it was a gift for Boedi
to thank him for sending him a new friend.\
• date: October 1988 • location: Mount Merapi

Cameron accompanies Muharto to a village on the upper slopes of the
Merapi volcano, to meet Muharto's spiritual advisor, Mbah Maridjan. The
three hike the steep incline to a shrine, effortlessly in the case of
the sexagenarian duo of Muharto and Maridjan, but with some difficulty
by their companion, some four decades their junior. Cameron watches
respectfully as the two intone Islamic prayers, then lay Hindu-style
floral offering at the shrine to the gods of the mountain. • date: 16
October 1988 • location: Aviation Museum Jogjakarta

Muharto takes Cameron to the Air Force museum in Jogja, a re-purposed
hanger filled with decommissioned aircraft and other exhibits. Muharto
points to a model of the Zogling training glider, and tells Cameron of
training training village boys who had never seen an airplane to become
skilled pilots in mere weeks.

☐ Expecting to fly

Muharto seeks out the curator, who invites them into his office. Muharto
asks the curator to retrieve scraps from the RI-002 wreckage stored at
the museum. One of the items is the dynamo with the bullet inexplicably
lodged in the windings. Muharto picks it up, and from his point of view,
the room around him fades into mist.

☐ About to crash

The room comes back into focus, and Muharto sees the concerned faces of
Cameron and the curator. Muharto places the dynamo back into the storage
box and says, in a wavering voice, that they will miss their train back
to Jakarta if they don't hurry.

• October 1988 • Library reading room

☐ Work in mention of George Reuneker Cameron returns to the National
Library reading room, where he spends the afternoon. After the room
closes for the afternoon, Cameron and Julia leave at the same time.

• October 1988 • Library parking lot

Cameron and Julia discover that they are now headed to the same
destination: the Hotel Borobudur, a nearby luxury hotel, where she will
meet friends in the coffee shop, and he a mate at the bar. Cameron
offers Julia a ride. She accepts, and is nonplussed when he takes her to
an army surplus Harley Davidson motorcycle in the parking lot. During
the thrilling ride, she briefly grabs Cameron's waist, to her
embarrassment. • October 1988 • Hotel Borobudur

Cameron and Julia walk into the lobby of the Hotel Borobudur together,
where her friends are waiting. Cameron greets them, then walks toward
the bar. Julia's friends grill her about the bule, with Julia insisting
that they are not even friends, just new acquaintances. The friends, who
are all anak jendral, insist that Julia should go out with him. All bule
are rich, they say, and maybe with his money Julia can finally come with
them on shopping trips to Singapore.

• date: 20 October 1988 • location: Boedi Living Room Jakarta

Cameron visits Boedi again to give him the Affandi sketch. Boedi is
delighted, and points out that any art dealer would buy this signed,
dated drawing by the Indonesian maestro for \$1000, no questions asked.
He praises Cameron for his honesty and offers him a beer. Now more
relaxed, Boedi regales Cameron with further tales of Bob Freeberg and
other foreign pilots, the Aviation Brotherhood.

<Boedi kids Moeharto about the approach to Manila>. Approaching Manila,
Muharto sits in co-pilot seat. Nervous, he mishears Bob's instructions,
and

1.  Bob gets job with CALI. immediately after arriving in Manila.

2.  Bob learns SE Airlines has been dissolved.

3.  Bob partners with Singapore based expat to start Southeastern
    Airlines

4.  3.  Bob sets up Southeastern Airlines. Recruits indolent expat to
        set up Southeastern Airlines.

5.  As Bob is now a businessman, not just a cargo pilot, orders suits to
    look presentable at meetings.

6.  For his oversized frame is a running gag. Not possible to get his
    size in Manila in 1947.

7.  Tom Lee tells Bob suits have probably been stolen

8.  Bob sues in court to force Walters to make a deal. Walters refuses.

9.  Salipada Penatun offers to have Walters deported. Tom Lee talks Bob
    out of it. Bob learns Singapore company has failed. Partners decided
    not to trust him after being badmouthed by Bob Walters.

10. Bob returns from third CALI flight to find plane missing

11. Asks around. Other pilot in bar gives him location

12. Freeberg and Walters partner to buy war surplus Dakota

, causing the Dakota to make a dramatic drop. Bob instantly corrects the
setting, and gently reminds Muharto to not pass the half-flaps setting
until they see the runway. Bob invites Muharto to take mechanics place
in right-hand seat, as he cannot be operating controls without a
licence. Bob gently chides Muharto for incorrect setting flaps on
approach to Manila. • Muharto thinks quickly and identifies himself as
co-pilot in accordance with regulations, banking that the Filiipino
aviation officers cannot read his Indonesian language Air Force ID.

Over drinks and dinner, Tom Lee asks Muharto and Boedi about the
political situation in Java. Boedi attempts to the steer the
conversation onto a neutral subject, but Tom presses the inquiry, and
Muharto obliges with more detailed info. After the dinner, Muharto tells
Boedi that he is pleased the Tom has such an interest in our struggle.
He also says he is guilty about accepting such generosity from the
American, and hopes that when the quinine his sold he can treat Tom to
dinner.

Boedi smiles and tells Cameron that Muharto need not have worried. Boedi
suspects that all their meals and drinks went on the "company" expense
account. Cameron's eyebrows shoot up; Boedi grins and clarifies that he
did not think Tom Lee was a spy. But as a former ambassador, Boedi knows
that Tom Lee fits the profile of an asset, who overtly seeks information
to be passed on to be analyzed.\
• date: October 1988 • location: JP Newsroom

In his office, Cameron tells Sabam that this might be an interesting
story, and might be a suitable subject for his master's thesis. He asks
Sabam's permission to use the Jakarta Post credentials to interview
prominent people who might be able to fill in details. Sabam agrees,
reluctantly, and admonishes Cameron to keep to questions to historical
events, and to not touch any subject that might be considered current
news. In return, Sabam tells Cameron to prepare a series of articles
about the coming capital market deregulation which will be run, without
a byline, as background. Cameron nods in agreement, thinking this a fair
arrangement.

Back at his desk, tells Syd of his assignment, and, in a sardonic voice,
if he can write articles that are "boring" enough to be financial
reporting. Syd lights a cigarette, takes his flask of whiskey from the
desk drawer, pours a splash into his coffee, and then into the coffee
cup on Cameron's desk, and says: "This whole deregulation thing will be
anything but boring. Let me tell you about what's really happening with
the stock market."

• October 1988 • Indonesian Business Advisory

Cameron visits Jim Castle, a financial consultant, in his office. Jim
says he had talked to Syd the previous evening, who vouched for him as a
"straight shooter". Jim takes a binder of photo copies from the
bookshelf behind his desk. It contains clippings by "Our Reporter" of
sex-crime stories faithfully translated to preserve the tone and
cultural references. Jim claims that Syd is, or more accurately was, the
most knowledgeable and insightful foreign journalist in Indonesian
history.

Jim elaborates on Syd's comments that the coming capital-market
deregulation will provide endless opportunity for scams and corruption.
His task now is to help the family owned enterprises he has advised for
years to "go public" and attract foreign investment. Foreigners are now
approaching these companies to help them inflate their actual worth,
often by enlisting the support of a senior military officer, and drive
up the initial offering price. The foreigners and military silent
partner will then cash out on the first days, leaving the company and
stockholders holding the bag.

As Cameron leaves, he notices that another company shares office space.
Jim tells him it is Indonesian Aviation Services, owned by the same
person that is his local partner. Cameron sees an office-door nameplate
"Frank Reuneker", and remembers the name "George Reuneker" from his
library research. Jim says that yes, Frank is the son of an Air Force
officer and offers to introduce him.

• Cameron recognizes Reuneker name and asks if any connection. The fact
that James vouches for Cameron encourages him to open up as well about
Ining. Ends with promise to write to Dave Fowler.

• Victor mentions name of Julius Tahija. • Back at JP, Cameron reads
bio. Suggests to Sabam that he interview him about dereg. Sabam cannot
see relevance but reluctantly agrees and sets up meeting.

• • Starting with Spoor • Assisting a dictator • Tracking the Flyboys •
Spoor livid over Ining incident • Reveals that Spoor was resisting
Westerling's coup plans • Instead, Spoor concentrated on rumors of KNIL
corruption.

Frank Reuneker writes to Dave Fowler, who replies with a long, detailed
letter. Sends it to Cameron. • Collapsing gear • Aborted intercept •
Going over Suryadarma's head • Rejecting Gold flight

• History of AURI • VT-CLA crash • Rivalry of Bambang and Moeljono

• date: October 1988 • location: Boedi living room

Muharto takes Cameron to interview Boediardjo, the RI-002 radio operator
who shot through the ranks to be appointed Air Force commander and,
after retirement, Minister of Information and Ambassador to Spain.

• date: October 1947 • location: RI-002 in flight Bob drops paratroopers
into a Republican area. It was the first jump for everyone, and many are
terrified. One soldier pulls his ripcord, spilling his parachute on the
deck. He swears it was an accident, but others grip their cords,
possibly ready to do the same. Boedi reports the situation to Bob, who
turns the controls over to Moeljono and goes back to the cargo area.
With Boedi interpreting, he gives the soldiers a pep talk, telling of
his own terror flying in the war. The soldiers all agree to jump. Boedi
watches as the parachutes drift down and are enveloped by the endless
forest.

Boedi tells Cameron that later, Bob discovers that all had been killed
by the Dutch commandos within hours.

At the end of the interview, Cameron compliments Boedi on his taste in
art, particularly the sweeping, vibrant expressionist works covering
much of the wall space in the living room. Boedi is pleased that the
American appreciates Indonesian art. He says that he is great friends
with the artist, Affandi, and suggests Cameron visit Affandi's museum if
he visits Jogjakarta. Muharto tells Cameron that he is planning to go to
Jogja to visit his spiritual advisor, and so they should go together so
he can also visit the Aviation Museum there, where items of RI-002
wreckage are stored.

• date: 16 October 1988 • location: Affandi Museum Jogjakarta

Muharto drops Cameron at the entrance to the Affandi museum, says he
will pick him up again in two hours, then drives away. Affandi, an
animated, disheveled elderly man, is sitting on a bench on the grounds
of the compound, as though he is homeless person seeking rest, not the
owner of the sprawling estate and a fortune in paintings and sculptures.
Affandi greets Cameron pleasantly, in English, and then becomes effusive
when Cameron brings greetings from Boedi. The fall into animated
conversation. Cameron explains the purpose of his visit, and Affandi
launches into a humorous and poignant narrative of painting propaganda
posters amid the privation and danger of besieged Jogjakarta.

Affandi has set up his easel in a marketplace. The only food on display
is withered vegetables, rotten casava, and a single, scrawny chicken.
The vendors are dressed in rags. Affandi paints in his expressionistic
style, with vibrant colors and distorted figures. One young man becomes
enraged at seeing the artist, takes some mud and throws it at the
canvas, shouting: "It's bad enough you draw us when we are clothed only
in rags. But you make a lousy painting we can't understand!"

Affandi tells Cameron that he had met Freeberg on a few occasions when
he was sketching the Maguwo for propaganda posters.

Affandi is sketching at the edge of the runway, near where RI-002 is
parked. Bob walks up to him and compliments the sketch. Affandi, who
speaks some English, asks Bob to briefly pose for him. Affandi was
struck at the immense respect Bob enjoyed from military and government
officials, and the adoration, the outright hero worship, of the common
Indonesians.

Affandi painted Freeberg standing in front of RI-002 as though he were
Bima, a hero in the wayang legends of ancient Java. Freeberg, like Bima,
was tall and imposing, strong and exceptionally skilled. And, like Bima,
Freeberg was modest and unpretentious, a gentle soul in a warrior's
body.

Cameron asks what happened to the painting. Affandi laughs and explains
that he and his friends at buried the propaganda paintings in the forest
when the Dutch overran Jogja. When the Dutch withdrew from Jogja six
months later, they returned to the forest, only to discover that
villagers had dug them up in the meantime.

• date: April 1949 • location: forest outside jogja

Villagers wearing rags that are literally falling off their bodies
appear in the forest and dig up the propaganda posters and paintings
buried there. The cut and fashion them into garments, proudly wearing
new pants and shirts lurid with colorful images.

Muharto reappears, greets Affandi with respect, and tells Cameron it is
time to go. Affandi grabs a sketch pad, dashes off a self-portrait,
signs it, and hands it Cameron, explaining that it was a gift for Boedi
to thank him for sending him a new friend.\
• date: October 1988 • location: Mount Merapi

Cameron accompanies Muharto to a village on the upper slopes of the
Merapi volcano, to meet Muharto's spiritual advisor, Mbah Maridjan. The
three hike the steep incline to a shrine, effortlessly in the case of
the sexagenarian duo of Muharto and Maridjan, but with some difficulty
by their companion, some four decades their junior. Cameron watches
respectfully as the two intone Islamic prayers, then lay Hindu-style
floral offering at the shrine to the gods of the mountain. • date: 16
October 1988 • location: Aviation Museum Jogjakarta

Muharto takes Cameron to the Air Force museum in Jogja, a re-purposed
hanger filled with decommissioned aircraft and other exhibits. Muharto
points to a model of the Zogling training glider, and tells Cameron of
training training village boys who had never seen an airplane to become
skilled pilots in mere weeks.

☐ Expecting to fly

Muharto seeks out the curator, who invites them into his office. Muharto
asks the curator to retrieve scraps from the RI-002 wreckage stored at
the museum. One of the items is the dynamo with the bullet inexplicably
lodged in the windings. Muharto picks it up, and from his point of view,
the room around him fades into mist.

☐ About to crash

The room comes back into focus, and Muharto sees the concerned faces of
Cameron and the curator. Muharto places the dynamo back into the storage
box and says, in a wavering voice, that they will miss their train back
to Jakarta if they don't hurry.

• October 1988 • Library reading room

☐ Work in mention of George Reuneker Cameron returns to the National
Library reading room, where he spends the afternoon. After the room
closes for the afternoon, Cameron and Julia leave at the same time.

• October 1988 • Library parking lot

Cameron and Julia discover that they are now headed to the same
destination: the Hotel Borobudur, a nearby luxury hotel, where she will
meet friends in the coffee shop, and he a mate at the bar. Cameron
offers Julia a ride. She accepts, and is nonplussed when he takes her to
an army surplus Harley Davidson motorcycle in the parking lot. During
the thrilling ride, she briefly grabs Cameron's waist, to her
embarrassment. • October 1988 • Hotel Borobudur

Cameron and Julia walk into the lobby of the Hotel Borobudur together,
where her friends are waiting. Cameron greets them, then walks toward
the bar. Julia's friends grill her about the bule, with Julia insisting
that they are not even friends, just new acquaintances. The friends, who
are all anak jendral, insist that Julia should go out with him. All bule
are rich, they say, and maybe with his money Julia can finally come with
them on shopping trips to Singapore.

• date: 20 October 1988 • location: Boedi Living Room Jakarta

Cameron visits Boedi again to give him the Affandi sketch. Boedi is
delighted, and points out that any art dealer would buy this signed,
dated drawing by the Indonesian maestro for \$1000, no questions asked.
He praises Cameron for his honesty and offers him a beer. Now more
relaxed, Boedi regales Cameron with further tales of Bob Freeberg and
other foreign pilots, the Aviation Brotherhood.

<Boedi kids Moeharto about the approach to Manila>. Approaching Manila,
Muharto sits in co-pilot seat. Nervous, he mishears Bob's instructions,
and

1.  Bob gets job with CALI. immediately after arriving in Manila.

2.  Bob learns SE Airlines has been dissolved.

3.  Bob partners with Singapore based expat to start Southeastern
    Airlines

4.  3.  Bob sets up Southeastern Airlines. Recruits indolent expat to
        set up Southeastern Airlines.

5.  As Bob is now a businessman, not just a cargo pilot, orders suits to
    look presentable at meetings.

6.  For his oversized frame is a running gag. Not possible to get his
    size in Manila in 1947.

7.  Tom Lee tells Bob suits have probably been stolen

8.  Bob sues in court to force Walters to make a deal. Walters refuses.

9.  Salipada Penatun offers to have Walters deported. Tom Lee talks Bob
    out of it. Bob learns Singapore company has failed. Partners decided
    not to trust him after being badmouthed by Bob Walters.

10. Bob returns from third CALI flight to find plane missing

11. Asks around. Other pilot in bar gives him location

12. Freeberg and Walters partner to buy war surplus Dakota

, causing the Dakota to make a dramatic drop. Bob instantly corrects the
setting, and gently reminds Muharto to not pass the half-flaps setting
until they see the runway. Bob invites Muharto to take mechanics place
in right-hand seat, as he cannot be operating controls without a
licence. Bob gently chides Muharto for incorrect setting flaps on
approach to Manila. • Muharto thinks quickly and identifies himself as
co-pilot in accordance with regulations, banking that the Filiipino
aviation officers cannot read his Indonesian language Air Force ID.

Over drinks and dinner, Tom Lee asks Muharto and Boedi about the
political situation in Java. Boedi attempts to the steer the
conversation onto a neutral subject, but Tom presses the inquiry, and
Muharto obliges with more detailed info. After the dinner, Muharto tells
Boedi that he is pleased the Tom has such an interest in our struggle.
He also says he is guilty about accepting such generosity from the
American, and hopes that when the quinine his sold he can treat Tom to
dinner.

Boedi smiles and tells Cameron that Muharto need not have worried. Boedi
suspects that all their meals and drinks went on the "company" expense
account. Cameron's eyebrows shoot up; Boedi grins and clarifies that he
did not think Tom Lee was a spy. But as a former ambassador, Boedi knows
that Tom Lee fits the profile of an asset, who overtly seeks information
to be passed on to be analyzed.\
• date: October 1988 • location: JP Newsroom

In his office, Cameron tells Sabam that this might be an interesting
story, and might be a suitable subject for his master's thesis. He asks
Sabam's permission to use the Jakarta Post credentials to interview
prominent people who might be able to fill in details. Sabam agrees,
reluctantly, and admonishes Cameron to keep to questions to historical
events, and to not touch any subject that might be considered current
news. In return, Sabam tells Cameron to prepare a series of articles
about the coming capital market deregulation which will be run, without
a byline, as background. Cameron nods in agreement, thinking this a fair
arrangement.

Back at his desk, tells Syd of his assignment, and, in a sardonic voice,
if he can write articles that are "boring" enough to be financial
reporting. Syd lights a cigarette, takes his flask of whiskey from the
desk drawer, pours a splash into his coffee, and then into the coffee
cup on Cameron's desk, and says: "This whole deregulation thing will be
anything but boring. Let me tell you about what's really happening with
the stock market."

• October 1988 • Indonesian Business Advisory

Cameron visits Jim Castle, a financial consultant, in his office. Jim
says he had talked to Syd the previous evening, who vouched for him as a
"straight shooter". Jim takes a binder of photo copies from the
bookshelf behind his desk. It contains clippings by "Our Reporter" of
sex-crime stories faithfully translated to preserve the tone and
cultural references. Jim claims that Syd is, or more accurately was, the
most knowledgeable and insightful foreign journalist in Indonesian
history.

Jim elaborates on Syd's comments that the coming capital-market
deregulation will provide endless opportunity for scams and corruption.
His task now is to help the family owned enterprises he has advised for
years to "go public" and attract foreign investment. Foreigners are now
approaching these companies to help them inflate their actual worth,
often by enlisting the support of a senior military officer, and drive
up the initial offering price. The foreigners and military silent
partner will then cash out on the first days, leaving the company and
stockholders holding the bag.

As Cameron leaves, he notices that another company shares office space.
Jim tells him it is Indonesian Aviation Services, owned by the same
person that is his local partner. Cameron sees an office-door nameplate
"Frank Reuneker", and remembers the name "George Reuneker" from his
library research. Jim says that yes, Frank is the son of an Air Force
officer and offers to introduce him.

• Cameron recognizes Reuneker name and asks if any connection. The fact
that James vouches for Cameron encourages him to open up as well about
Ining. Ends with promise to write to Dave Fowler.

• Victor mentions name of Julius Tahija. • Back at JP, Cameron reads
bio. Suggests to Sabam that he interview him about dereg. Sabam cannot
see relevance but reluctantly agrees and sets up meeting.

• • Starting with Spoor • Assisting a dictator • Tracking the Flyboys •
Spoor livid over Ining incident • Reveals that Spoor was resisting
Westerling's coup plans • Instead, Spoor concentrated on rumors of KNIL
corruption.

Frank Reuneker writes to Dave Fowler, who replies with a long, detailed
letter. Sends it to Cameron. • Collapsing gear • Aborted intercept •
Going over Suryadarma's head • Rejecting Gold flight

• History of AURI • VT-CLA crash • Rivalry of Bambang and Moeljono
