---
title: Cameron Does His Research
status: new
---

On 26 September 1988, Cameron writes up the interview, and gives it to
managing editor Sabam Siagian, who had given him the assignment. Sabam
glances at the copy, grunts, then passes the pages to Syd Jardine, the
senior copy editor. Syd reads it carefully, then remarks that Freeberg
comes off as a "super-pilot" and not believable. He suggests Cameron
find other accounts of Bob by researching in the reference section of
the newly opened National Library.

On 27 September 1988, Cameron uses his Jakarta Post credentials to gain
access to the reference section of the National Library. Julia
Suryakusuma, an attractive, bookish woman in her early 20s, is the only
staffer speaking fluent English, and so is assigned to assist him, as
visitors are now allowing into the stacks. Cameron explains his mission,
and Julia disappears into the stacks, returning shortly with a few books
written by foreigners about the period. Skimming through the material,
Cameron's attention is drawn to a passage in a book by British diplomat
John Coast relating events at a gathering of foreign aviators in the
mountain town of Bukittinggi, a Republican base of operations.

On the evening of 8 March 1948 in the ballroom of the former Dutch
governor's palace in Bukittinggi, Richard Cobley drunkenly accuses Bob
of taking the best blockade-running contracts through his close
relationship with the Indonesian government. Later, while Bob stumbles
along an unlit path to his lodgings, Cobley confronts him, warning that
an "accident" might happen to his ramshackle Dakota unless he shares the
wealth.
