---
title: Julia finds Emeria Bio
status: new
---

Julia is intrigued about Emeria, so in mid October 1988 she researches
in Dutch-language art publications. Julia learns that Emeria, who was in
her late 20s during the struggle period, was the first female Indonesian
painter of modern art. She was from an aristocratic family and extremely
well-connected, with contacts at the highest levels in both Dutch and
Indonesian society.

Julia returns to IPPHOS in late October 1988 and presses Victor to tell
her more about Emeria. Victor first refuses, but Julia turns on the
charm.

On 10 November 1946, Victor marches off troop ship with other recruits.
Among his possessions is a Malay-Dutch phrasebook and a sketchpad.
Victor had been told that he and his fellow recruits were being sent to
protect the Javanese subjects of the Dutch queen from a gang of
criminals and collaborators, so he had studied Malay on the voyage to be
about to communicate with the people under his protection. During the
voyage Victor had made extensive sketches of the landscape at ports of
call and along coastlines. This had attracted the attention of an
officer, who praised the rendering of detail.

In January 1947, on completion of basic training, Victor was assigned to
the mapping department as a junior draftsman upon the recommendation of
an officer who had seen his sketches. In the mapping department, Victor
is also trained to develop photographs taken in the field to provide
references for the maps. The head cartographer, a civilian who is also
an amateur artist, realizes that Victor has a good eye for composition,
and allows him to learn photography by borrowing cameras to use during
his off-duty hours.

In August 1947, several of the Indonesian draftsman in the mapping
office, who are are amateur artists themselves, invite Victor to
accompany them to the exhibitions of Batavia's arts scene, now regaining
vibrancy after years of privation. At an event featuring the flamboyant
Dutch artist Auke Sonnega, the artist overhears Victor giving astute
criticism of his paintings. He introduces himself and suggests Victor
write up some notes and send them, along with the photos, to a friend
who works for the Bataviaasch Nieuwsblad newspaper. Victor becomes a
regular contributor to the paper, covering the arts circuit and doing
photographic essays on street life, all while concealing his status as a
KNIL recruit.

Arriving at work one day in September 1947, Victor sees a sealed
envelope on his desk that he knows to be reassignment orders. He opens
the envelope with dread, certain that he is being sent to a combat unit.
But the orders are for Victor to report to KNIL headquarters, where he
will work as an assistant photographic technician and analyst with
Spoor's intelligence unit.

In October 1947, Victor singles out Emeria as the highlight of the
exhibition in one of his reviews. A few days later, Emeria contacts
Victor Jan Boon to invite Victor to her studio.
