---
title: Kalimantan Paratroopers
date: 17 October 1947 
location: RI-002 
status: ok
synopsis: Bob drops paratroopers behind Dutch lines in Kalimantan, this first such action durint the struggle for independence. 
---
Bob and Boedi fly ten paratroopers to be dropped near an insurgent stronghold in the forests of Kalimantan. None have jumped before, or even been in a aircraft, so tension is high. There is an uproar as the parachute of one trooper opens and dumps onto the cabin floor. The trooper swears it was an accident, but all others accuse him of cowardice. The troopers look at each other, wondering if any one will be next. Boedi enters the cabin. Though he is only an airman, the charismatic Boedi takes command of the situation, assuring the troopers that Bob has much wartime experience flying paratroopers and will drop them safely. He goes to the cockpit and talks with Bob for a moment. The Bob turns the aircraft over to his co pilot, leaves his seat and stands in the doorway, his body filling the frame. With Boedi translating, Bob assures the troops that he has done this many times during the war, and will drop them exactly on the requested target. Emboldened by Bobs air of quiet competence, each trooper moves forward and shakes Bobs hand. Bob returns to his seat, the dropmaster issues the command to jump, and the cabin empties, save for the dropmaster and a lone recruit wondering what fate is in store for him back at Maguwo. Boedi watches as the parachutes drift down and land are enveloped by the endless forest. Boedi asks Bob how many paradrops he made. Bob grins and answers: "None. I was a Navy pilot. All my missions were over water."