---
title: Old Aviators Reunion
status: new
---

In mid October 1988, Muharto takes Cameron to a long-overdue reunion
with Boediardjo, the radio operator of RI-002. The two old comrades
revel in recounting their experiences on RI-002, including the time Bob
dove into a tropical storm to evade a Dutch patrol.

As they approach Manila on 10 June 1947, Bob invites Muharto to sit in
co-pilot seat and assist him with the flap controls Muharto is nervous,
and pushes the flaps to full.

At the airport on 10 June 1947, Bob is told to identify his co-pilot, a
requirement for twin-engine aircraft on long-haul flights. Muharto
gambles the Filipino officers cannot read Indonesia, and shows them his
Air Force identification and falsely claims the rank of "Pilot".

On 17 October 1947, Bob and Boedi fly ten paratroopers to be dropped
near an insurgent stronghold in the forests of Kalimantan. None have
jumped before, or even been in a aircraft, so tension is high. There is
an uproar as the parachute of one trooper opens and dumps onto the cabin
floor. The trooper swears it was an accident, but all others accuse him
of cowardice. The troopers look at each other, wondering if any one will
be next. Boedi enters the cabin. Though he is only an airman, the
charismatic Boedi takes command of the situation, assuring the troopers
that Bob has much wartime experience flying paratroopers and will drop
them safely. He goes to the cockpit and talks with Bob for a moment. The
Bob turns the aircraft over to his co pilot, leaves his seat and stands
in the doorway, his body filling the frame. With Boedi translating, Bob
assures the troops that he has done this many times during the war, and
will drop them exactly on the requested target. Emboldened by Bobs air
of quiet competence, each trooper moves forward and shakes Bobs hand.
Bob returns to his seat, the dropmaster issues the command to jump, and
the cabin empties, save for the dropmaster and a lone recruit wondering
what fate is in store for him back at Maguwo. Boedi watches as the
parachutes drift down and land are enveloped by the endless forest.
Boedi asks Bob how many paradrops he made. Bob grins and answers: "None.
I was a Navy pilot. All my missions were over water."

On 20 October 1947 Bob flies two Indonesian aviators, Halim and Iswandi,
to Bangkok where they will purchase a twin-prop airplane that will
become RI-003. Dutch authorities pressure the Thai government to detain
Freeberg as a blockade runner. The Thais briefly detain Freeberg in a
comfortable hotel room, but the Indonesian crew must find their own
accommodation. They can only afford rooms in a bar district. Boedi is
delighted, but Halim and Iswandi are appalled. Both are engaged to be
married, and worry that the families of their respective fianc√©es will
learn that they have stayed in such a disreputable environment.

On 10 October 1947 Bob flies three United Nations representatives to
Sumatra, where they will assess popular support for the Republic.

One evening in late October 1947, Bob invites Muharto to join him for
dinner at the Hotel Merdeka. Bob is embarrassed when served the last can
of corned beef left by the GOC delegates.
