---
title: Pang Soeparto Remembers
status: new
---

In early October 1988, Muharto takes Cameron to visit Pang Soeparto.
Pang is effusive in praising Muharto for winning the court case for the
quinine, and how Muharto kept up spirits during the weeks of penury
trying to sell the quinine and return home.

On 11 June 1947 Muharto awakes to discover that he and his crew are
celebrities, with several newspapers giving front-page treatment to
RI-002 and the "Javanese Crew".

On 12 June 1947 Dutch representatives in Manila sue Muharto and Pang in
civil court for possession of the quinine. Fortunately, Muharto's
celebrity status also attracts the attention of Salipada Penatun, a
sitting Senator as well as a practicing lawyer. His family has close
cultural ties to Indonesia, and so offers his services pro bono.

On 13 June 1947 Bob and Muharto are challenging the Dutch claim over the
quinine cargo. Their lawyer, Salipada Penatun lays out the legal
justification for ownership of the quinine, then lets Muharto give an
impassioned plea, claiming that the money from selling the quinine will
buy medicines and other essentials unavailable in the besieged capital.
The Dutch counter by calling a plantation expert to testify that the
Republic does not have the capability to process quinine, so the drug
must have been produced in a Dutch-owed factory before the war. Muharto
jumps to his feet, ready to protest this insult to his people's
technological skill, but Penatun motions for him to sit down, then
calmly tells the judge: "A foreigner is not qualified to discuss the
internal matters of the sovereign Republic of Indonesia." The judge
considers this with some sympathy, declines to allow the expert witness,
and adjourns the session.

On 29 July 1947, the judge rules in favor of the Republicans.

On 29 July 1947, Bob invites Muharto, Pang, and Boedi to his apartment
to celebrate that morning's verdict awarding the quinine to them. Bob's
housemate has a military-grade short-wave radio, which Boedi immediately
switches on and scans the military and civilian frequencies. The party
mood vanishes when a news broadcast announces that an Indian blockade
runner has been shot down on approach to Maguwo. All look toward Bob,
and he nods in acknowledgement that RI-002 might be the last remaining
hope to connect the Republic with the rest of the world.

By mid August 1947, Muharto, Boedi and Pang are penniless as they wait
for a buyer for the quinine Bob buys his "Javanese boys" a single meal
each day at the cheapest eatery in Manila: The Madras Curry Restaurant.
Muharto protests as Bob again picks up the bill for their bowls of
curry. But Bob insists that as captain of RI-002 he is responsible for
their well-being until he returns them safely to Java.

One day in August 1947, Muharto attempts to pay for their meals at
Madras Curry, explaining that it is an honorarium for a talk to a group
of the lady lawyers. To his surprise, Bob chastises him for "taking
money for nothing".

In mid August 1947, Salipada arranges for Muharto and Pang to meet Major
Primitivo of the intelligence service. In the meeting, Primitivo says
that his government, to show solidarity with the embattled Republic,
wants to send a seasoned guerrilla fighter to train the youth militias,
but only under conditions of absolute secrecy. Primitivo then summons
and introduces Captain Ignacio Espina.

At a party to celebrate the sale of the quinine in mid September 1947,
Ining shows himself to be a party animal, buying rounds for his
companions and flirting with the foreign women. Bob and Boedi hustle him
out of bar after he hits on American colonels teenage daughter.

At the mention of Espina, Muharto's face clouds, and tells Pang they
must be going now. Cameron asks Muharto why they are in such a hurry,
but he does not respond.
