---
title: Photographic Memory
status: new
---

In mid October 1988 Julia and Cameron enter the IPPHOS office, located
on the ground floor of a building in the colonial-era section of Jakarta
and one municiple inspection away from being condemned. An ancient air
conditioner wheezes over a window, having no discernible effect on the
heat and humidity. The office has a single occupant: Victor, a slight,
elderly man of sallow complexion, is the only person in the office who
is openly delighted at receiving company. Julia introduces Cameron and
explains the purpose of their visit. The negatives and prints of the
collection are stored in tattered folders placed seemingly at random,
but Victor strides confidently to a shelf, pulls out a folder from the
middle of a pile, and brings it back to the desk. He leafs through the
folder and pulls out a strip of negatives showing a large American
standing in front of an airplane. It is Bob Freeberg and RI-002. Victor
repeats the process and shows Cameron images of Spoor in his office.
Victor explains that he was a recruit posted to KNIL headquarters as an
photographer analyst. His desk was close to Spoor's office, and
remembers on many occasion overhearing Spoor raging about the foreign
pilots running the Dutch blockade with impunity.

Victor searches for more shots of Batavia to prod his memory about
Spoor's efforts to stop the blockade runs. He stops when he comes across
a photo of a strikingly beautiful Indonesian woman who, though dressed
in baggy, paint-splattered overalls radiates elegance and poise. The
caption reads "Emeria Soenassa in her studio 1948". Julia asks Victor
who she is. Victor replies "No one important", snatches the photo from
the table and files it away.
