# Episode 1

**In 06/07/47 June 1947** Bob Freeberg lands his unmarked Dakota cargo
plane on a remote beach in southwest Java, the huge aircraft shuddering
to a stop a few meters from a cliff at one end. Villagers appear,
marveling at this colossus from the sky. They are friendly and offer Bob
and his two Filipino crew members food and a place to sleep. But the
following morning, Indonesian soldiers appear. One points to the lack of
registration on the Dakotas tail and shouts "*Mata-Mata*!", "Spy!" All
point their rifles directly at Bob. He replies with the only Indonesian
words he knows, a name: "Captain Petit Muharto"

**In 09/25/88 September 1988** Petit Muharto, a lively, dapper
Indonesian in his late 60s, is sitting with his wife Ani in their cosy
living room in the Jakarta suburbs when they hear the roar of a large
motorcycle approaching. Muharto, in jest, covers his ears, and is then
surprised when the motorcycle stops in front of their house. A moment
later, there is a knock on the door. Ani opens it to find Cameron
Bishop, an engaging, disheveled young American, who says has an
appointment to interview Muharto about his experiences with Bob
Freeberg.

Though Muharto had expected to be interviewed by a journalist, not a
"Hells Angel", he invites Cameron to enter (though insisting he remove
his motorcycle boots). After obligatory pleasantries, Muharto launches
into his tales of running the blockade in Freeberg's ramshackle,
war-surplus Dakota, beginning with a surprise telephone message he
received from Pang Suparto, an army officer stationed in west Java,
announcing that a foreign pilot had landed on a nearby beach and was
asking for Muharto by name.

Muharto receives a telephone call at his desk in Maguwo Air Base near
Jogjakarta. On the line is Pang Soeparto, an army lieutenant stationed
in Tasikmalaya, forming him that an American landed an unmarked cargo
aircraft on a nearby beach and is asking for him by name. The connection
is poor, and Muharto can not make out the pilot's name or any other
information. Muharto takes this information to his commander,
Suryadarma, who agrees that the matter is worth investigation. Muharto
flies to Tasikmalaya in an open-cockpit Japanese monoplane.

**In a flashback to 09/25/88 September 1988** Muharto tells Cameron that
this aircraft, a Nikosoren, was one of a score of aircraft the Japanese
left behind as not-airworthy. The air force mechanics kept the aircraft
flying through skill and guesswork, but Muharto was aware that any
flight could end in disaster.

To keep his mind from this fate, Muharto thought about the American
pilots he had met during the blockade runs he had organized from
Singapore to Jogjakarta. He decided that only Bob Freeberg possessed the
skill and nerve to land at night on a narrow beach. Bob had been the
pilot of the third blockade run. Though these had been standard charter
flights -- they even had a flight attendant, a lovely Filipina named
Miss Brown -- the third flight would test the skills of any aviator.

Bob Freeberg is at the controls of the Dakota CALI blockade run from
Singapore to Jogja. Petit Muharto stands in the cockpit behind Freeberg,
staring out the window at the cloud cover below them, broken by the tips
of volcanic cones. In the featureless cloudscape, Muharto cannot
identify the mountains with any certainty. Freeberg spots a break in the
cloud cover and dives through it. The co-pilot looks at Freeberg in
alarm, and Miss Brown clutches the cockpit doorframe and gasps. The
Dakota reaches the bottom of the cloud layer, and Muharto can see they
are in a wide valley with a clear view south to the sea. Muharto spots a
railway line, and tells Freeberg to follow it to Jogja. Freeberg smiles
and banks the Dakota, while Muharto desperately tries to remember if the
tracks tunnel through any mountains before it reaches Jogja.

As the aircraft is being unloaded and refueled for the return to
Singapore, Muharto introduces Bob to Suryadarma, who thanks him for his
assistance. Then Suryadarma takes Muharto aside and tells him that this
will be his last blockade run. An Indian businessman has offered to link
India with the Republic with his own Dakota, VT-CLA, and has the full
support of the Indian government, so further chartered runs will not be
necessary.

**In a flashback to 09/25/88 September 1988** Muharto tells Cameron that
he was pleased at this display of crucial international support, but
dismayed that once again he will be desk-bound. However, this last fight
will be memorable, as Suryadarma asked Bob to make a couple of detours
on the way back to Singapore. Bob cheerfully agreed.

Muharto asks Bob if he can attempt a landing on a refurbished Japanese
airstrip at Karangendah on the grasslands of south Sumatra. They circle
the strip and Bob ponders the attempt. Muharto asks if he can land a
plane this size. Bob replies that he did this all the time in the war: I
can "land on a dime and give you a nickel change."

Bob makes a spectacular landing, engines roaring with reverse thrust.
Muharto asks if he can take off again. Bob replies: "I hope so. We seem
to be smack dab in the middle of nowhere."

Santoso, the base commander climbs aboard to meet them. After a short
conversation, Santoso exits, and Bob takes off, the wheels finally
lifting off the runway a few meters before the end.

The CALI Dakota flies over the Bukit Barisan mountaintops, and drops
into a valley toward the town of Bukittinggi. At Muharto's direction,
Bob passes low over an airstrip, which is full of potholes and so
nunusable. The co-pilot leaves his seat and goes to the cargo
compartment, motioning to Miss Brown and Muharto to sit down far from
the door. The two other passengers are donning parachutes and preparing
to jump. The co-pilot wrenches open the door, and scraps of paper and
cardboard swirl as the air stream enters the cabin. The two parachutists
jump out the door. Muharto looks out of the window behind him, sees the
parachutists land squarely on the airstrip, and remarks on Freeberg's
piloting skills.

**In a flashback to October 1988** Muharto tells Cameron he bid Freeberg
farewell in Singapore and returned to Jogja some days later on VT-CLA.
Two months later, he flew into Tasik, meeting Pang Suparto, who
confirmed that the pilot wss indeed Bob Freeberg. They loaded two
barrels of aviation fuel into a jeep and drove to the beach.

Muharto and Pang arrive on the beach. Muharto recognizes Freeberg and
they greet as friends. Fearing that a patrolling Dutch fighter could
appear at any time, Muharto, in a stirring speech, implores the
assembled villagers to literally tear apart their houses to fashion an
improvised runway from the bamboo mats used as walls. They do so, and
with Muharto and Pang on board, the Dakota takes off and flies to
Maguwo.

In Jogjakarta, Suryadarma commissions Bob to fly a cargo of high-value
quinine to Manila and return with essential medicines and spare parts.
Muharto expresses concern about the reception that might await unmarked
aircraft carrying high-value goods into Manila. He suggests that they
paint a fictitious registration number onto the tail. After some debate,
Muharto, Bob, and Suryadarma agree on "RI-002", reserving "RI-001" for a
future presidential aircraft.

Muharto takes Bob to meet Soekarno at the presidential palace. As was
his custom in private conversation, Soekarno treats Bob as an equal and
urges him to stay and help the struggle.

Bob, Muharto and Boedi fly Republican economists and other experts to
Manila to meet with United Nations representatives in the hill town of
Baguio.

**In a flashback to October 1988** After the successful Baguio mission,
the Dutch felt humiliated. Muharto believes that Simon Spoor, the
commander, took Bob's flights as a personal affront, and vowed to bring
him down.

No content

**In a flashback to 09/25/88 September 1988** Muharto tells Cameron that
the situation was so chaotic, with the Dutch threatening to invade the
Republic, that a proper search of the rugged terrain on the flight path
was not possible. The wreckage was only discovered three decades later
by two local farmers searching for land to till. They immediately
reported their find to local authorities, and a few days later led an
Air Force investigation team to the site.

Two wiry men dressed in shabby clothes lead a squad of airmen and their
officer, Lt. Sulaiman, through a forested hillside to the wreckage of
RI-002. The airmen set up camp and search the area. They find fragments
of a wing with the faded letters: RI-00, other airplane parts, including
a dynamo with a bullet wedged between the windings and armature. There
are a few fragments of human remains, which the soldiers reverently dig
from the earth and carefully wrap in cloth. The also find two empty
wooden crates labeled: "Gold", but a through search of the area does not
find any trace of the metal itself.

In an otherwise empty hanger, five coffins draped in Indonesian flags
lay on a platform. A sixth coffin, larger than the rest and without a
flag, rests on a separate platform. A flatbed truck pulls into the
hanger and a squad of airmen, in silence, pick up each of the coffins
and place them on the truck. But they leave the sixth coffin where it
lies as the truck pulls away.

**In a flashback to 09/25/88 September 1988** Muharto tells Cameron that
the sixth coffin, presumably containing Bobs remains, could not be
buried with the others because he was a foreigner. Muhartos expression
as he finishes his reminiscences convinces Cameron that he regarded
Freeberg as a close friend, and is seeking closure about his mysterious
disappearance. As Cameron rises to leave, Muharto wonders that if he had
turned down promotion and had been with Bob on the final flight, maybe
it would not have ended in tragedy.

**In September 1988** Richard says he will only run the piece if Cameron
fleshes it out with research. Cant run a story based on one old mans
memories. He tells Cameron to go to the new national library in Jakarta
and find some mention of Freeberg on contemporaneous accounts.

When Cameron enters the National Library reference section, the desk
attendant summons Julia, an attractive, bookish Indonesian woman in her
early twenties who usually assists foreign researchers because of her
fluency in English and Dutch. Cameron explains his mission. Julia
suggests that Cameron start with accounts written by Americans and Brits
present in Indonesia at the time. Julia disappears into the stacks, soon
emerging with an armful of books.

Cameron is still deep in his research at lunch time. He asks Julia where
he can get a quick meal, and she invites him to join her for lunch at a
nearby warung. Over lunch, Julia complains to Cameron about the
narrow-mindedness of Indonesians and limited opportunity for a women to
build an academic career. Sensing a kindred spirit, Cameron tells of his
dream to become a famous international journalist. But Julia stops him.
With a mischievous smile, she tells Cameron that says that if she wants
to know anything about him, she will ask her father, a colonel in Army
intelligence who is tasked with keeping an eye on resident foreigners.

Richard grudgingly accepts the story for publication, but warns Cameron
to stick to his beat of financial reporting. The deregulation of the
Indonesian stock market is coming up -- thats the real story.

**In 10/02/88 October 1988** Cameron visits to deliver extra copies of
the magazine requested by Muharto. Muharto is beaming, friends have been
phoning all morning from Manila and Bangkok.

He tells Cameron that when he showed the article to his business
colleagues, no one had heard of Freeberg. Muharto asks Cameron if he
might help to solve the mystery so the services of Bob Freeberg are not
lost to history. Tells of frustration doing initial research in early
1980s. Military feigns ignorance. Libraries unorganized or zealously
guarded. The initial report by Sulaiman contained anomalies. Noted that
a large group might have visited the site a few months previously. The
few fragments of human remains could not be identified, and no gold was
found.

Cameron tells Muharto that things have changed now. He was impressed
with the new library, especially the grad student working there who
seemed to be able to find anything.
