27 September 1988 - Jakarta Post
================================

Cameron, an American post-grad student on a one-year internship as an
English-language consultant at the The Jakarta Post, pitches a story
idea to Sabam Siagian, a a well-groomed, middle-aged Indonesian who
speaks with the rough accent common to his ethnic group, the Batak.
Sabam rolls his eyes and explains, yet again, that under the rules set
down by the government, non-Indonesian newsroom staff cannot do actual
reporting. Then Sabam relaxes his gruff demeanor and tells Cameron he
can interview his old friend former Air Force officer Petit Muharto
about his experiences during the post-war struggle against the Dutch.
This is a feature, not news, and anyway, says Sabam "No one else has
time."

28 September 1988 - Muharto Residence
=====================================

::: {#meeting-muharto .section}
Petit Muharto, a lively, dapper Indonesian in his late 60s, is sitting
with his wife Ani in their cosy living room in the Jakarta suburbs when
they hear the roar of a large motorcycle approaching. Muharto, in jest,
covers his ears, and is then surprised when the motorcycle stops in
front of their house. A moment later, there is a knock on the door. Ani
opens it to find Cameron, in jeans and motorcycle boots, asking for
Muharto. Once over his surprise at being interviewed by a "Hell's Angel"
Muharto tells the story of the Bob Freeberg and RI-002, beginning with a
surprise call he received a his desk in Maguwo Air Base in Jogjakarta.
:::

7 June 1947 - Maguwo
====================

Muharto receives a telephone call from Pang Suparto, a army officer
serving at a base in Tasikmalaya. about 300 km to the west. Pang tells
Muharto that a foreign pilot has landed a C-47 military cargo aircraft
on a nearby beach. When Pang, who speaks little English, questioned the
pilot, he asked for Muharto by name.

Muharto reports the surprising call to Suryadarma, the commander of the
Air Force. Suryadarma grins, saying: "Must be one of your foreign flyboy
friends", and sends Muharto to Tasik to investigate.

28 September 1988 - Muharto Residence
=====================================

::: {#flight-to-tasik .section}
Muharto tells Cameron that he flew to Tasik in a powerful, open-cockpit
monoplane flown by a pilot barely out of his teens and who had not even
seen an airplane until the previous year. During the 30-minute flight,
Muharto pondered who the American pilot might be, and decided it must be
Bob Freeberg. He remembered meeting Freeberg two months before when he
accompanied the third blockade run he had organized with the
Manilia-based CALI charter airline.
:::

March 1947 - Maguwo
===================

Bob Freeberg, large, fit man in his mid twenties with a pleasant,
serious demeanor, pilots a CALI blockade run from Singapore to Jogja.
Petit Muharto stands behind the two pilots, staring out the window at
the cloud cover below them, broken by the tips of volcanic cones. In the
featureless cloudscape, Muharto cannot identify the mountains with any
certainty,

. Visibility is too poor to navigate by identifying the sorrounding
mountains and landmarks, so Muharto tells Freeberg follow the railway
line eastward, as it winds through the lowlands to Jogja and a safe
landing.

As the aircraft is being unloaded and refueled for the return to
Singapore, Muharto introduces Bob to Suryadarma, who thanks him for his
assistance. Then Suryadarma takes Muharto aside and tells him that this
will be his last blockade run. An Indian businessman has offered to link
India with the Republic with his own Dakota, VT-CLA, and has the full
support of the Indian government. Muharto is both pleased at this
display of crucial international support, and dismayed that once again
he will be desk-bound. However, thanks to Bob, his last flight will be a
memorable one.

31 March 1947 - Karangendah
===========================

Before takeoff on the return trip to Singapore, Muharto asks Bob if he
can attempt a landing on a refurbished Japanese airstrip at Karenengah.
Bob readily agrees. They circle the strip and Bob ponders the attempt.
Muharto asks if he can land a plane this size. Bob replies that he did
this all the time in the war. He can "land on a dime and give you a
nickel change." Then Muharto asks if he can take off again. Bob replies:
"I certainly hope so. We seem to be smack dab in the middle of nowhere."

Bob makes a spectacular landing, engines roaring with reverse thrust.
Santoso, the base commander climbs aboard to meet them. After a short
conversation, Santoso exits, and Bob takes off, the wheels finally
lifting off the runway a few meters before the end.

31 March 1947 - CALI
====================

The CALI Dakota flies over the Bukit Barisan mountaintops, and drops
into a valley toward the town of Bukittinggi. At Muharto's direction,
Bob passes low over an airstrip, which is full of potholes and unusable.
The co-pilot leaves his seat and goes to the cargo compartment,
motioning to Miss Brown and Muharto to sit down far from the door. The
two other passengers are donning parachutes and preparing to jump. The
co-pilot wrenches open the door, and scraps of paper and cardboard swirl
as the air stream enters the cabin. The two parachutists jump out the
door. Muharto looks out of the window behind him, sees the parachutists
land squarely on the airstrip, and remarks on Freeberg's piloting
skills.

8 June 1947 - Tasik Army Base
=============================

Muharto meets Pang Suparto and together they take two barrels of
aviation fuel to the beach where Freeberg is stranded. When Muharto sees
the beach, bookended by two rivers and the gap between the water and
palm trees scarcely wider than the Dakota's wing span, he knew that only
Bob Freeberg had the skill to make that landing.

9 June 1947 - Cikolong
======================

As Muharto and Pang walk over the soft sand toward the Dakota, Muharto
sees Bob Freeberg crouched beside a wheel, digging away the sand with a
shovel. The man turns around and grins when he sees Muharto approaching.

Muharto sees that the Dakota is undamaged but stuck in the soft sand.
They first try to fashion a runway from coconut fronds, but the leaves
disintegrate under the wheels of the heavy Dakota. By this time hundreds
of villagers had arrived to witness the outlandish spectacle. Muharto
looks around the village, and notices that most houses have walls of
woven bamboo. He gets an idea, climbs with Bob onto the wing of the
Dakota, and launches into an impassioned speech saying that this brave
foreigner is our friend and will help us drive the despised Dutch from
our land. The villagers cheer, and Muharto is joined by Pang, the army
officer, who tells the assembled crowd to, literally, tear their own
houses apart to lay the bamboo mats on the sand. A few hours later, the
Dakota, which Muharto on board, takes off and flies away, the mats
flying backwards in the propeller backwash.

9 June 1947 - Maguwo
====================

The Dakota lands in Jogjakarta, where Suryadarma commissions Bob to fly
a cargo of high-value quinine to Manila and return with essential
medicines and spare parts. The war-surplus Dakota is still unregistered,
so to forestall potential problems with Philippine authorities, Muharto
suggests that the designation RI-002 be painted on the tail. Bob
protests that since his is the first aircraft registered by Indonesia,
it should be RI-001. Suryadarma explains the RI-001 is being held in
reserve for a future presidential aircraft, which cannot be owned by a
foreigner.

10 July 1947 - RI002
====================

Bob invites Muharto to sit in co-pilot seat and assist him with the flap
controls during the final approach to Manila. But when Bob gives the
command, the nervous Muharto pushed the levers to full, causing the
Dakota lurch downward. Bob instantly repositions the levers, and gently
reminds Muharto to not pass the half-flaps setting until they see the
runway.

10 June 1947 - Manila Airport
=============================

Instead, however, an official asked Bob to identify his copilot. This
was evidently a requirement for a Dakota on an international flight. Bob
looked around helplessly until I stepped forward and said: "I am the
copilot!" After all, I had been sitting in the right-hand seat when we
landed. "Please show me your license," the official said. I hesitated
and then took out my Air Force identification card. In Indonesian, it
read: Muharto: Opsir Udara III. During this period, the English
translation of my rank would have been Flight Lieutenant. This rank does
not necessarily indicate that I could actually fly an airplane. On the
reasonable assumption that 58 ONE MAN AIR FORCE none of the Filipinos
were familiar with Indonesian military rank designations, I gave myself
a demotion of one grade and stated my rank as Pilot Officer. That
satisfied them,

12 June 1947 - Tom Lee Residence
================================

Muharto stays with Bob's friend Tom Lee, a government lawyer. Over
breakfast, Tom reads the newspaper headlines about "Fearless Bob
Freeberg" and his "Javanese Crew". One article reports that the Dutch
are laying claim to the valuable quinine cargo as the "Javanese Crew"
are "subjects of the Dutch Queen".

20 June 1947 - Manila Courtroom
===============================

Salipada Penatun, who is also a sitting senator with extensive
high-level contacts, lays out the legal justification for ownership of
the quinine, then lets Muharto give an impassioned plea, claiming that
the money from selling the quinine will buy medicines and other
essentials unavailable in the besieged capital. The Dutch counter by
calling a plantation expert to testify that the Republic does not have
the capability to process quinine, so the drug must have been produced
in a Dutch-owed factory before the war. Muharto jumps to his feet, ready
to protest this insult to his people's technological skill, but Penatun
motions for him to sit down, then calmly tells the judge: "A foreigner
is not qualified to discuss the internal matters of the sovereign
Republic of Indonesia." The judge considers this, obviously with some
sympathy, and adjourns the session.

August 1947 - Madras Curry
==========================

As they wait for a buyer for the quinine Muharto, Boedi, and Pang eat a
single meal each day, all at the cheapest restaurant they can find:
Madras Curry. Some days Bob joins them and pays the bill, inisting that
he is responsible for their well-being until he returns them to Java.

September 1947 - Madras Curry Manila
====================================

Muharto attempts to pay for their meals at Madras Curry, explaining that
it is an honorarium for the talk to the lady lawyers. To his surprise,
Bob chastises him for "taking money for nothing".

29 July 1947 - Manila Courthouse
================================

Muharto wins quinine case. Dutch are pissed.

March 1947 - Singapore
======================

29 July 1947 - Bob apartment
============================

Bob invites Muharto and Boedi to his apartment for dinner and drinks to
celebrate their victory in court and plan their next moves. Bob says
that he and a partner in Singapore are setting up Southeastern airlines.
With two more aircraft, Bob can set up scheduled blockade runs between
Manila, Bangkok and Jogja, like a regular airline. Boedi turns on Bob's
shortwave radio and searches for news broadcasts from the Indies. Then
they listen in horror to reports that VT-CLA, an Indian-registered
Dakota that had made many blockade runs, had been shot down on approach
to Maguwo. Muharto turns to Bob and asks if he is still willing to aid
the Republic by flying through the blockade at the risk of being shot
down. Bob nods.

21 September 1947 - RI-002
==========================

RI-002 returns to Jogja with their clandestine passenger, Captain
Espina. The need for secrecy compels Freeberg to fly non-stop from the
southernmost military airfield in the Philippines to Jogjakarta. Bob
installs a spare fuel tank, but high winds deplete the reserve delay
contact with Java until after dark. Muharto has difficulty identifying
landmarks in the gloom, and tension mounts in the cabin as the fuels
gauges slide toward empty. Finally, Muharto draws on the vivid schoolboy
memory of his classmates describing a range of low, rounded hills near
Jogja as female breasts. He orients himself by the landmark geographic
feature and guides Bob to a safe landing in Jogja. RI-002 flies between
the volcanic peaks of Java, which throw ominous shadows over the land in
as the sun sets. Since the presence of Captain Espina could not be
revealed, RI-002 was forced to fly non-stop from Manila, extending the
range with a spare fuel tank installed in the cargo hold. That was now
empty, as well as the wing tanks. Freeberg asks Muharto to identify
landmarks with increasing urgency. Muharto peers out the window, unsure
of what can barely make out in the gathering gloom. Finally, Freeberg
almost shouts: "Dammit Muharto! Where are we? You should know! This is
your country!" A nervous laugh escapes Muharto's lips, as usual for an
embarrassed Javanese person. Muharto looks out the cockpit window again,
and again laughs, this time in delight at a schoolboy memory. Muharto
has spotted a line of low, rounded hills that he and his school mates
called, naturally, the "Susu Seribu", the Thousand Breasts. With this
vivid memory trigger Muharto can clearly visualize the relevant page in
his school atlas. Now with authority in his voice, he tells Freeberg:
"Fly toward those hills, turn to the west and follow them until the last
one, then turn back north and fly for 30 kilometers." A few minutes
later, RI-002 lands in Maguwo, the engines sputtering to a halt as it
rolls along the runway.

Finally, in September we flew back to Jogja. Boedi tells of tension in
the cockpit as Muharto prevaricates. Then finally, Muharto comes
through. He asks Boedi about the hills in front of them. They agree they
are the susu seribut that they tittered over in middle school. We
arrived long after dark. We could not announce our arrival. Our radio
was working, but the spare parts needed for the base radio was our cargo
cabin. As we approached, all the lights in the city flickered out. Then
points of light, flashlights pointed skyward, appeared throughout the
town. These were Dutch sympathizers, signaling what they thought was a
Dutch aircraft, a reminder that not all Indonesians were on our side. We
had to get the runway lights on. I told Bob about the signal a CALI crew
had used on the first blockade run, playing with the propeller pitch and
speed controls to produce an undulating drone, like a low-pitched siren.
Bob did this, and a few moments later the runway lights blazed on, and
we landed.

October 1947 - Presidential Palace
==================================

Muharto takes Bob to meet Soekarno At the presidential palace. As was
his custom in private conversation, Soekarno treats Bob as an equal and
urges him to stay and help the struggle.

17 October 1947 - RI002
=======================

Bob drops paratroopers into a Republican area. It was the first jump for
everyone, and many are terrified. One soldier pulls his ripcord,
spilling his parachute on the deck. He swears it was an accident, but
others grip their cords, possibly ready to do the same. Boedi reports
the situation to Bob, who turns the controls over to Moeljono and goes
back to the cargo area. With Boedi interpreting, he gives the soldiers a
pep talk, telling of his own terror flying in the war. The soldiers all
agree to jump. Boedi watches as the parachutes drift down and are
enveloped by the endless forest.

October 1947 - Bangkok
======================

Bob flies Halim and Iswandi to Bangkok. They will fly a recently
purchased Avro Ansen airplane back to Indonesia, where it will become
RI-003. Freeberg is detained by Thai authorities at the request of the
Dutch. However, the Thais can find no evidence of wrongdoing, as so
release him, to Dutch fury.

30 November 1947 - RI-002
=========================

Freeberg, Muharto and Boedi fly Republican economists and other experts
to Manila to meet with United Nations representatives in the hill town
of Baguio. The delegates, who are all prominent figures in the Republic
and have cosmopolitan backgrounds, treat Bob with as much respect as do
the hero-worshipping common people of Jogja.

May 1948 - Maguwo
=================

Suryadarma promotes Muharto to major and assigns him to desk duties at
Maguwo.

28 September 1988 - Muharto
===========================

Three weeks before the wedding Muharto is devastated to learn that
RI-002 is missing.

28 September 1988 - Muharto Residence
=====================================

::: {#muharto-investigates .section}
Muharto tells Cameron that the situation was so chaotic, with the Dutch
threatening to invade the Republic, that a proper search of the rugged
terrain on the flight path was not possible. A few years previously
Muharto had began his own investigations in AURI archives, finding the
report of the team sent to investigate the crash site. Muharto
researches in AURI archive and other collections. Finds only disorder
and obstruction as librarians make life difficult. He finds the
investigation report, which asks more questions than it answers. Photo
of dynamo with bullet in windings. Sulaiman and team investigate
wreckage. Find empty crates of gold of the results of his research,
beginning with the

Muharto shows Cameron the results of his research, beginning with the
Muharto explains that he became aware of the discovery of the crash
site, wholly by accident, some five years previously. He wrote to his
contacts in the Air Force and to the officers who participated in the
crash-site investigation, but received vague, non-committal replies ---
or only silence.
:::

19 April 1977 - Punggur
=======================

Two wiry men dressed in shabby clothes lead a squad of airmen and their
officer, Lt. Sulaiman, through a forested hillside to the wreckage of
RI-002. The airmen set up camp and search the area. They find fragments
of a wing with the faded letters: RI-00, other airplane parts, including
a dynamo with a bullet wedged between the windings and armature. They
also find two empty wooden crates labeled with name of a gold mine in
Java, but a thorough search of the area does not find any trace of the
gold itself.

Sulaiman finds evidence that a sizable group had set up a field camp as
they had done. They had been here recently, Sulaiman assumes, as the
rapid vegetation growth in this tropical rain forest would have
obliterated all signs of their presence in a few months.

The airmen dig through the earth around the wreckage, finding
unidentifiable fragments of human remains. With great reverence, they
clean the soil from the remains, wrap them in clean, white cloth and
place them in a backpack. Sulaiman takes a last look around the site,
then orders his men to pack up and leave, taking with them the remains
and pieces of wreckage small enough to carry.

29 July 1977 - Teluk Betulu Air Force base
==========================================

In an otherwise empty hanger, five coffins draped in Indonesian flags
lay on a platform. A sixth coffin, larger than the rest and without a
flag, rests on a separate platform. A flatbed truck pulls into the
hanger and a squad of airmen, in silence, pick up each of the coffins
and place them on the truck. But they leave the sixth coffin where it
lies as the truck pulls away.

28 September 1988 - Muharto Residence
=====================================

::: {#muharto-regrets .section}
Muharto tells Cameron that the sixth coffin, presumably containing Bob's
remains, could not be buried with the others because he was a foreigner.
Muharto explains that he became aware of the discovery of the crash
site, wholly accident, some five years previously. He wrote his contacts
in the air force and to the officers who participated in the crash-site
investigation, but received only vague, non-committal replies -- or only
silence. Muharto's expression as he finished his reminiscences convinces
Cameron that he regarded Freeberg as a close friend, and is seeking
closure about his mysterious disappearance. Muharto finishes by saying,
wistfully, that his is sure many people know more about the mystery of
RI-002 than they are telling. Muharto tells Cameron that the sixth
coffin, presumably containing Bob's remains, could not be buried with
the others as a foreigner cannot be interred in a cemetery for national
heroes, however much he may deserve the honor himself through his
services to the nation.

Muharto's expression as he finished his reminiscences convinces Cameron
that he regarded Freeberg as a close friend, and is seeking closure
about his mysterious disappearance. Muharto wonders that if he had
turned down promotion and had been with Bob on the final flight, maybe
it would not have ended in tragedy.

Muharto ends his recollection by explaining how Freeberg vanished while
transporting a fortune in gold to safety ahead of an expected Dutch
invasion. Farmers had stumbled upon the wreckage of RI-002 on a remote
mountainside ten years previously, but could not identify Freeberg's
remains from the few fragments of bones they found. Cameron senses the
genuine sadness in Muharto that the fate of his friend and fellow pilot
remains unknown.
:::

29 September 1988 - Jakarta Post
================================

Cameron sits at his desk, making final corrections on a paper copy of
his article. Sabam strides from his office into the newsroom, He is
waving a copy of the Jakarta Post newspaper he approaches Syd Jardine, a
disheveled, chain-smoking, older American sitting at the adjacent desk.
Sabam slams the newspaper on his desk, points to an article "Ladyboy
Molested By Sex-Crazed Gang", with the byline: "Our Reporter" and
shouts: "This is a family newspaper!".

Sabam turns, and Cameron hands him the sheets of paper. He grunts, hands
them back to Cameron, and tells him that the piece needs more
background, suggesting he go to the library and read a book he had
discovered in the reference section: *Recruit to Revolution*

says: "Needs more background"

glances at them, grunts, then hands them to Syd and strides out the
door, followed by his driver carrying Sabam's briefcase.

Syd reads the piece, and says it needs a photo of Freeberg himself, not
just the generic photos that Muharto gave him. Syd suggests that Cameron
try the Indonesian Photo Agency, IPPHOS, who have an extensive
collection of images from the period. An old Dutch-born photojournalist,
Victor, looks after the place. "He will find one", Syd says. "He has,
literally, a 'photographic memory'".

October 1988 - Library
======================

He is greeted, in fluent English, by Julia, an attractive, bookish
Indonesian woman in her early twenties. Julia finds the sole copy of
*Recruit to Revolution*, which, like all items in the collection, cannot
be taken from the premises. Cameron settles down to read the book and
take copious notes of the historical background of the struggle as seen
through the eyes of the author.

At the library, Julia, a grad student working in the reference section,
retrieves the book for Cameron. He is not allowed to take the book from
the reading room, and so stays for several hours, making copious notes
of the historical background of the struggle as seen through the eyes of
the author.

Because Julia has the best English of the staff, she is also informally
the person delegated to attending to foreign visitors. Julia finds the
sole copy of Recruit to Revolution, reminds Cameron to be careful not to
rip the pages of the volume, which is starting to deteriorate.

Cameron visits the library and meets Julia. He discovers that Syd is
correct, Julia brings him exactly what he requires from the restricted
rare books section. He is not allowed to take the books with him, so he
reads and takes notes all morning. He is not allowed to bring liquids
into the reading room, so Julia takes Cameron to the library canteen for
coffee. Julia tells Cameron about her desire to take her post graduate
degree in Europe or American. In return, Cameron attempts to tell Julia
about his background, but Julia cuts him off, saying, with a mischievous
grin, that she can learn all about him from her father, a general in
military intelligence.

Cameron visits the National Library. Using his Jakarta Post credentials,
he is admitted to the limited-access reference section, an archive of
publications and books dating back to colonial times. He is greeted, in
fluent English, by Julia, an attractive, bookish Indonesian woman in her
early twenties. Julia finds the sole copy of *Recruit to Revolution*,
which, like all items in the collection, cannot be taken from the
premises. Cameron settles down to read the book and take copious notes
of the historical background of the struggle as seen through the eyes of
the author.

At the library, Julia, a grad student working in the reference section,
retrieves the book for Cameron. He is not allowed to take the book from
the reading room, and so stays for several hours, making copious notes
of the historical background of the struggle as seen through the eyes of
the author.

Because Julia has the best English of the staff, she is also informally
the person delegated to attending to foreign visitors. Julia finds the
sole copy of Recruit to Revolution, reminds Cameron to be careful not to
rip the pages of the volume, which is starting to deteriorate.

February 1948 - Bukittinggi
===========================

experiences as a diplomatic consultant. He advised both Soekarno and
Hatta, and talked to American diplomats at length about the situation.
His conversations indicated that many Americans were sympathetic to the
Indonesian struggle, but the American government itself preferred that
the archipelago remain in Dutch hands for the time being as a bulwark
against encroaching communist influence from the north.

Coast also remarks on his encounters with Bob Freeberg. He found him to
be enigmatic, though modest and seemingly decent. He described Freeberg
as .

October 1988 - library canteen
==============================

He asks Julia where he can get some coffee. No liquids are allowed the
reading room, so Julia says she was just about to take a break herself,
and invites Cameron to join her in the canteen. As Cameron drinks his
coffee and Julia her tea, After two hours Cameron asks if he can get
some coffee. Julia says that no food or beverages are allowed in the
reading room, and offers to escort him to the library canteen. They chat
over coffee, Julia tells Cameron that she is in her final year, and is
doing her undergrad thesis, She is hoping for a scholarship to study
overseas. In the meantime, because of her fluency in both Dutch and
English, Julia has been hired to help organize the publications
collection of the new national library. Julia casually mentions that her
father, who is a general in Army Intelligence, probably knows all about
him, to Cameron's consternation.

Julia asks Cameron about how he likes living in Indonesia. Cameron
replies that he loves it, except for one annoying habit. Indonesians
always ask how old he is, where he is from, and whether he is married.
Cameron says that this is too personal to discuss with some random
stranger. Julia replies that Indonesians consider such inquiries to be
meaningless pleasantries, like "How are you", or "What's new". She then
assures Cameron: Don't worry, I won't bother you. If I want to know
anything I'll just ask my dad\".

At Cameron's quizzical look, Julia smiles and explains that her father
is a general with the the Army's Intel section. Though Julia is plainly
teasing him, Cameron nonetheless gulps down his coffee and says he
should get back to work.

29 September 1988 - Jakarta Post
================================

Cameron finishes his second rewrite as Sabam, wearing an expensive batik
shirt suitable for a formal event, strides into the newsroom. He stops
at Syd's desk to ask a question. Cameron takes this opportunity to give
Sabam the rewrite. Sabam looks at it, grunts, and hands it to Syd. He
then turns and strides out the door, followed by his driver carrying
Sabam's briefcase.

Syd reads the piece, and says it needs a photo of Freeberg himself, not
just the generic photos that Muharto gave him. Cameron's face reflects
his annoyance at having to do yet more work on the story. Syd reacts,
saying that it is a good article and deserves being done properly.
Cameron is somewhat mollified.

Syd says that finding a good shot will be easy. He tells Cameron to go
to the Indonesian Photo Agency, IPPHOS, who have an extensive collection
of images from the period. He says a Dutch-born photojournalist, Victor,
looks after the place. "He will find one", Syd says. "He has, literally,
a 'photographic memory'".

29 September 1988 - IPPHOS
==========================

Cameron walks into IPPHOS office, a ramshackle collection of photgraphs
and filing cabinets housed in a colonial-era building one government
inspection away from condemnation. Inside is an elderly white person
who, indeed, is Victor. Syd had been correct in his assessment. When
Cameron makes his request, Victor goes straight to a filing cabinent,
pulls out a drawer, and retrieves a photograph of Freeberg, dressed in
greasy mechanic's overalls, speaking with Suryadarma on the Maguwo
tarmac.

Cameron asks the fee for using the photographs. Victor replies "two
coffees" and points to a warung on the sidewalk. Cameron shrugs, buys
the coffees, returns, and sits a table with Victor.

Victor tells Cameron to give his regards to Syd, and then asks for more
details about the Muharto interview. Cameron recaps, and ends by
repeating Muharto's suspicion that much remains to be discovered. Victor
says: "Of course. Spoor was behind it all. He hated Freeberg with an
all-consuming passion."

October 1947 - KNIL
===================

November 1947 - KNIL
====================

Spoor and senior government officials are incensed about the blockade
runners willfully ingoring orders to land in Batavia and submit to cargo
inspection. Spoor singles out RI-002 and Freeberg for having fictituous
"RI" registration, a sure sign that he is a gun runner -- or worse.

2 October 1988 - Jakarta Post
=============================

April 1947 - Tanjung Priok
==========================

June 1947 - Kuntskring
======================

August 1947 - Kuntskring
========================

October 1988 - Merapi
=====================

Cameron accompanies Muharto to a village on the upper slopes of the
Merapi volcano, to meet Muharto's spiritual advisor, Mbah Maridjan. The
three hike the steep incline to a shrine, effortlessly in the case of
the sexagenarian duo of Muharto and Maridjan, but with some difficulty
by their companion, some four decades their junior. Cameron watches
respectfully as the two intone Islamic prayers, then lay Hindu-style
floral offering at the shrine to the gods of the mountain.

16 October 1988 - Aviation Museum
=================================

Muharto takes Cameron to the Air Force museum in Jogja, a re-purposed
hanger filled with decommissioned aircraft and other exhibits. Muharto
points to a model of the Zogling training glider, and tells Cameron of
training village boys who had never seen an airplane to become skilled
pilots in mere weeks. Muharto seeks out the curator, who invites them
into his office. Muharto asks the curator to retrieve scraps from the
RI-002 wreckage stored at the museum. One of the items is the dynamo
with the bullet inexplicably lodged in the windings. Muharto picks it
up, and from his point of view, the room around him fades into mist. The
room comes back into focus, and Muharto sees the concerned faces of
Cameron and the curator. Muharto places the dynamo back into the storage
box and says, in a wavering voice, that they will miss their train back
to Jakarta if they don't hurry.

Muharto takes Cameron to the Air Force museum in Jogja, a re-purposed
hanger filled with decommissioned aircraft and other exhibits. Muharto
points to a model of the Zogling training glider, and tells Cameron of
training village boys who had never seen an airplane to become skilled
pilots in mere weeks. Muharto seeks out the curator, who invites them
into his office. Muharto asks the curator to retrieve scraps from the
RI-002 wreckage stored at the museum. One of the items is the dynamo
with the bullet inexplicably lodged in the windings. Muharto picks it
up, and from his point of view, the room around him fades into mist. The
room comes back into focus, and Muharto sees the concerned faces of
Cameron and the curator. Muharto places the dynamo back into the storage
box and says, in a wavering voice, that they will miss their train back
to Jakarta if they don't hurry.

Muharto takes Cameron to the Air Force museum in Jogja, a re-purposed
hanger filled with decommissioned aircraft and other exhibits, which
stir evoke vivid memories of the role of the Air Force in the struggle
for independence. In the curator's office, Muharto handles the dynamo
with the bullet lodged in the windings, and has a mystical vision of
RI-002 in the seconds before the crash.

October 1988 - Boedi
====================

Syd introduces Cameron to Boedi, Affandi and stereo. Suggests Cameron
visit Affandi Museum if he ever goes to Jogja. Boedi tells of stranded
in Manila, Paradrop and Soekarno Tour Boedi talks about various theories
on auri mess in following years. Cameron repeats muharto claim about
regretting promotion.

Syd introduces Cameron to Boedi, Affandi and stereo. Suggests Cameron
visit Affandi Museum if he ever goes to Jogja. Boedi tells of stranded
in Manila, Paradrop and Soekarno Tour Boedi talks about various theories
on auri mess in following years. Cameron repeats muharto claim about
regretting promotion.

Boedi says muharto has a lot to regret in his life (foreshadowing
Permesta revelation) and that maybe Cameron should help him. Who knows,
he says, you might get a best selling book if you solve the mystery.
Boedi says muharto has a lot to regret in his life (foreshadowing
Permesta revelation) and that maybe Cameron should help him. Who knows,
he says, you might get a best selling book if you solve the mystery.

The organization sponsoring Cameron's internship invites him to attend a
gathering of visiting academics in the cultural and tourism field. The
host is Boediardjo, a former Air Force officer and government minister.
In the spacious reception area of his colonial-era mansion in Menteng,
Jakarta's most-exclusive neighborhood. Cameron is impressed by the
European and Indonesian artworks covering the extensive wall space, and
by the McIntosh tube amp and Quad speakers denoting a true, and
well-heeled, audiophile. Boedi recognizes Cameron as the writer of the
Jakarta Post article about Bob Freeberg, inquires about Muharto's
well-being, and informs Cameron that he had been the radio operator of
RI-002 until July 1948. Cameron is taken aback, and asks for an
interview. The other guests must leave soon after dinner to catch an
early flight, so Boedi invites Cameron to stay behind.

Boedi begins by describing Bob as one of the most patient, unflappable
persons he had ever met. Smiling, Boedi remarks that this was a
necessary quality for flying with Indonesians during the early years of
nation hood. During colonial times, the Dutch had only admitted a
handful of native sons into flight school. So even Air Force officers
had had little hands-on experience with actual aircraft, as Captain
Muharto proved when Bob asked him to sit in the co-pilot seat as they
approached Manila on the first flight of RI-002.

Muharto takes Cameron to interview Boedi. Muharto and Boedi goad each
other on amusing tales of being stranded in Manila. Eating one curry
meal a day etc Boedi tells of Paradrop and Soekarno Tour. Starts to talk
about Ining, but sees Muharto pained expression. Drops the subject.
Boedi talks about various theories on auri mess in following years.
date: October 1988 location: Boediardjo Residence

17 October 1947 - RI002
=======================

Bob drops paratroopers into a Republican area. It was the first jump for
everyone, and many are terrified. One soldier pulls his ripcord,
spilling his parachute on the deck. He swears it was an accident, but
others grip their cords, possibly ready to do the same. Boedi reports
the situation to Bob, who turns the controls over to Moeljono and goes
back to the cargo area. With Boedi interpreting, he gives the soldiers a
pep talk, telling of his own terror flying in the war. The soldiers all
agree to jump. Boedi watches as the parachutes drift down and are
enveloped by the endless forest.

October 1947 - Bangkok
======================

Bob flies Halim and Iswandi to Bangkok. They will fly a recently
purchased Avro Ansen airplane back to Indonesia, where it will become
RI-003. Freeberg is detained by Thai authorities at the request of the
Dutch. However, the Thais can find no evidence of wrongdoing, as so
release him, to Dutch fury.

-
=

August 1947 - ABBar
===================

The gregarious and charismatic Boedi had been wholly accepted by the
Aviation Brotherhood, the freewheeling foreign pilots seeking their
fortunes or reliving wartime adventures in often-dangerous charter
flights into remote areas of the region. Over drinks in the AB bar,
Boedi learns more about Bob, particularly the recognition by his peers
that he is the most skillful and courageous aviator in Southeast Asia.
Boedi also learns that Freeberg is in considerable financial difficulty,
and is in a legal battle with another aviator, Bob Walters, his partner
in purchasing the aircraft now known as RI-002. Walters is scathing in
his condemnation, calling Bob a thief and a con man.

September 1947 - Madras Curry Manila
====================================

Muharto attempts to pay for their meals at Madras Curry, explaining that
it is an honorarium for the talk to the lady lawyers. To his surprise,
Bob chastises him for "taking money for nothing".
