---
title: Cameron Interviews Muharto
stories:
  - Syd Edits Cameron
  - Cameron Offers To Help
category: tc
status: new
---

In September 1988, Cameron Bishop, an American journalism student interning at The Jakarta
Post as a copy editor, interviews retired Air Force Major Petit Muharto, an old
friend of his editor, Sabam Siagian, about his experiences flying
blockade runs with Bob Freeberg. Muharto begins his narrative by telling Cameron of a message he received one morning at his desk in Maguwo air base in Jogjakarta.

On 8 June 1947, Muharto is surprised to be given a message from an army
lieutenant stationed in Tasikmalaya informing him that a foreign pilot
had landed an unmarked cargo aircraft on a nearby beach and,
astoundingly, had asked for Muharto by name. Muharto takes this
information to his commander, Suryadarma, who tells him to fly to Tasik
and find out which of Muharto's "foreign flyboy friends" it is.

Muharto flies to Tasikmalaya and meets  Pang Suparto, the officer who had sent him the message. who confirms that
it was indeed Bob Freeberg stuck on the beach. They load two barrels
of aviation fuel into a jeep and drive to the coast.



Muharto leads a blockade run with Bob Freeberg, then a contract pilot
for a Manila-based charter airline, as captain. Amid poor visibility
over Java, Bob demonstrates his piloting skill by diving through a break
in the clouds, leveling off under the cloud cover a few hundred meters
above the ground. Muharto spots a railway line, and tells Bob that it
leads along the valley to terminate in Jogja. Bob follows the line,
barely visible through the rain, and jokingly asks Muharto if there are
any tunnels between here the Jogja. The look on Muharto's face suggests
that he is not entirely sure.

In  Tasikmalaya, Muharto meets

Arriving at Cilotok, Muharto and Pang marvel that Freeberg had been able to land on this short stretch of beach, bookended by high bluffs. Muharto recognizes Freeberg and they greet as friends. Fearing that a patrolling Dutch fighter could appear at any time, Muharto, in a stirring speech, implores the assembled villagers to tear apart their houses to fashion an improvised runway from the bamboo mats used as walls. They do so, and with Muharto and Pang on board, the Dakota takes off and flies to Maguwo.

Suryadarma commissions Bob to fly a cargo of high-value quinine to
Manila and return with essential medicines and spare parts. Muharto
expresses concern about the reception that might await unmarked aircraft
carrying high-value goods into Manila. He suggests that they paint a
fictitious registration number onto the tail. Muharto suggests RI-002.
Bob says it should be RI-001, as his is the first aircraft. Suryadarma,
imperiously, states that "RI-001" is reserved for a future presidential
aircraft. Bob grumbles as Suryadarma issues the order to paint the
number on the Dakota's tail.

In Manila, Dutch diplomats claim the quinine cargo as Dutch
property, and take them to court. 

Bob and Muharto are challenging the Dutch claim over the quinine cargo.
Their lawyer, Salipada Penatun, who is also a sitting senator with
extensive high-level contacts, lays out the legal justification for
ownership of the quinine, then lets Muharto give an impassioned plea,
claiming that the money from selling the quinine will buy medicines and
other essentials unavailable in the besieged capital. The Dutch counter
by calling a plantation expert to testify that the Republic does not
have the capability to process quinine, so the drug must have been
produced in a Dutch-owed factory before the war. Muharto jumps to his
feet, ready to protest this insult to his people's technological skill,
but Penatun motions for him to sit down, then calmly tells the judge: "A
foreigner is not qualified to discuss the internal matters of the
sovereign Republic of Indonesia." The judge considers this with some
sympathy, declines to allow the expert witness, and adjourns the
session. 



Muharto tells Cameron that he, Boedi and Pang were penniless as they
waited for the verdict to be handed down. Bob found them basic
accommodation in a boarding house, and bought them a single meal each
day at the cheapest eatery in Manila: The Madras Curry Restaurant.

Muharto protests as Bob again picks up the bill for their bowls of
curry. But Bob insists that as captain of RI-002 he is responsible for
their well-being until he returns them safely to Java.

Bob invites Muharto, Pang, and Boedi to his apartment to celebrate that
morning's verdict awarding the quinine to them. Bob's housemate has a
military-grade short-wave radio, which Boedi immediately switches on and
scans the military and civilian frequencies. The party mood vanishes
when a news broadcast announces that an Indian blockade runner had been
shot down on approach to Maguwo. All look toward Bob, and he nods in
acknowledgement that RI-002 might be the last remaining hope to connect
the Republic with the rest of the world.

Muharto tells Cameron that they finally managed to sell the quinine in
September and return to Java. For security reasons RI-002 had to make
the trip non-stop, which left them dangerously low on fuel as they
reached Java.

In the gathering darkness, Muharto has difficulty identifying landmarks.
Tension mounts in the cabin as the fuels gauges slide toward empty. Bob
admonishes Muharto saying: "This is your country, you should now where
we are!" Muharto draws on the vivid schoolboy memory of his classmates
giggling as they describe a range of low, rounded hills near Jogja as
female breasts. He soon spots the distinctive geographic feature and,
now oriented, guides Bob to a safe landing in Jogja.

Muharto takes Bob for an afternoon walk to introduce him to Jogja, and
they visit the palace of the former Dutch governor, now repurposed as
the seat of the Indonesian Republic. As Bob admires the architecture, he
is astounded to suddenly be ushered into the office of President
Soekarno. As is his custom in private conversation, Soekarno treats Bob
as an equal and puts him at ease, imploring the American to help his
people in their struggle for freedom.

Muharto tells Cameron that Bob became an invaluable link between the
besieged republic and the outside world, flying high-value agricultural
products to Singapore and Manila, and returning with medicine and spare
parts for vehicles, generators, and the like. Though essential, the
missions were hardly exciting or glamorous, though there were moments.

Muharto spots an small airplane near the horizon as they fly near Dutch
territory. This is most likely a Dutch fighter on patrol, so Bob steers
RI-002 into a violent tropical storm. Boedi grins when he sees Muharto's
terrified face as the Dakota is violently buffeted, with sickening
plunges in altitude. Bob tells Muharto to not worry; when a Navy test
pilot he would fly through typhoons.

Bob flies a team of Republican officials and technocrats to a United
Nation's conference in the Philippines, where they successfully made the
case for Indonesian independence. These highly educated, cosmopolitan
men treat Bob with the same great respect as do the common people of
Jogja.

Muharto tells Cameron that he flew with RI-002 until May 1948, when he
was promoted to major and posted to headquarters. Muharto saw little of
Bob after that, but was looking for forward to having Bob as guest of
honor at this wedding in October.

Muharto sees Bob off on the runway. Bob tells Muharto that he will be in
Singapore and Manila for a couple of weeks, but promises to return to
Jogja with his own fiancee in time to attend Muharto's wedding.

Muharto tells Cameron that on the afternoon of 1 October he heard
reports that RI-002 had not arrived at Bukittinggi. In the following
days, the Dutch denied any knowledge of the disappearance, and the
Republic was unable to mount more than a cursory search. Muharto shows
Cameron a clipping dated 1983 about ratten gatherers finding wreckage on
a remote mountain in South Sumatra. Muharto said that he used his AURI
credentials to research the archives for the investigation report. He
found, to his astonishment, that the wreckage had actually been
discovered in April 1977.

Two wiry men dressed in shabby clothes lead a squad of airmen and their
officer, Lt. Sulaiman, through a forested hillside to the wreckage of
RI-002. The airmen set up camp and search the area. They find fragments
of a wing with the faded letters: RI-00, other airplane parts, including
a dynamo with a bullet wedged between the windings and armature. There
are a few fragments of human remains, which the soldiers reverently dig
from the earth and carefully wrap in cloth. They also find two empty
wooden crates labeled: "Gold", but a thorough search of the area does
not find any trace of the treasure itself.

Five coffins draped in Indonesian flags lay on a platform in an
otherwise empty hanger. A sixth coffin, larger than the rest and without
a flag, rests on a separate platform. A flatbed truck pulls into the
hanger and a squad of airmen, in silence, pick up each of the
flag-draped coffins and place them on the truck. But they leave the
sixth coffin where it lies as the truck pulls away.

Muharto tells Cameron that the sixth coffin, presumably containing Bob's
remains, could not be buried with the others because he was a foreigner.
Muharto's expression as he finishes his reminiscences convinces Cameron
that he regarded Freeberg as a close friend, and is seeking closure
about his mysterious disappearance. As Cameron rises to leave, Muharto
wonders that if he had turned down promotion and had been with Bob on
the final flight, maybe it would not have ended in tragedy.

 
