---
title: Julia Discovers Emeria
category: tc
status: new
---

Julia is intrigued about Emeria, so she does some research in
Dutch-language art publications. Learns she was the first Indonesian
painter of modern art and a socialite with contacts at the highest
levels in both Dutch and Indonesian society.

Julia presses Victor to tell her more about Emeria.

Victor marches off a troop ship with other conscripts. While waiting for
transport to the barracks, Victor photographs a paper boy, then buys a
newspaper from him seconds before the police chase the boy away. The
other soldiers gather around Victor as he reads aloud in Dutch what is
obviously Indonesian-language text, occasionally pausing to look up a
word in a Dutch-Malay pocket dictionary.

Victor's familiarity with photography gains him a plum assignment to the
Mapping Dept, where he develops and classifies photographs taken by
field surveyors. Several of the Indonesian map makers are amateur
artists, and so Victor is invited to accompany them to the exhibitions
of Batavia's vibrant arts scene. At an event featuring the flamboyant
Dutch artist Auke Sonnega, the artist overhears Victor giving astute
criticism of his paintings. He introduces himself and suggests Victor
write up some notes and send them, along with the photos, to a friend
who works for the Bataviaasch Nieuwsblad newspaper. Victor becomes a
regular contributor to the paper, covering the arts circuit and doing
photographic essays on street life, all while concealing his status as a
KNIL recruit.

When Victor arrives at work on day, he sees a sealed envelope on his
desk that he knows to be reassignment orders. He opens the envelope with
dread, certain that he is being sent to a combat unit. But the orders
are for Victor to report to KNIL headquarters, where he will work with
Spoors intelligence unit.

Victor attends a solo exhibition by Emeria at the Kuntskring. She lays
on the charm, and he promises to write a review of her work in the BN.

Through Emeria, Victor meets prominent Republican figures, who Spoor and
the colonial government seek to portray as opportunistic thugs and
bandits. Victor is astounded to discover that most are well-educated
with sophisticated and pragmatic political beliefs.

 
