Cameron visits Muharto to say that he would like to help Muharto finally solve the mystery of RI-002. Muharto is
delighted, saying that a good place to start would be the Aviation Museum in Jogjakarta, where the items recovered from the RI-002 wreckage are stored. In addition, he could visit his spiritual advisor there to seek supernatural blessing for a successful outcome of their endeavors. 

Cameron accompanies Muharto to a village on the upper slopes of the
Merapi volcano to meet Muharto’s spiritual advisor, Mbah Maridjan. The
three hike the steep incline to a shrine, effortlessly in the case of
the sexagenarian duo, but with some difficulty by their companion, some
four decades their junior. Cameron watches respectfully as the two
intone Islamic prayers, then lay Hindu-style floral offerings at the
shrine to the gods of the fire mountain.

Muharto takes Cameron to the Air Force museum in Jogja, a re-purposed
hanger filled with decommissioned aircraft and other exhibits. Muharto
points to a model of the Zogling training glider, and tells Cameron of
training village boys who had never seen an airplane to become
skilled pilots in mere weeks. Muharto seeks out the curator, who invites
them into his office. Muharto asks the curator to retrieve scraps from
the RI-002 wreckage stored at the museum. One of the items is the dynamo
with the bullet inexplicably lodged in the windings. Muharto picks it
up, and suddenly the room around him fades into mist, and he is in the
radio nook of RI-002. He sees indistinct shapes in the cockpit and the
forested mountain slopes terrifyingly close through the windows. He
hears screams from the passenger cabin behind the bulkhead, and from
engines pushed beyond their limits. Then, the room comes back into
focus, and Muharto sees the concerned faces of Cameron and the curator.
Muharto places the dynamo back into the storage box and says, in a
wavering voice, that they will miss their train back to Jakarta if they
don’t hurry.