---
identifier: ce4bd8e0
title: Beach Landing
date: 9 June 1947 
location: Cikolong
---

``` {.synopsis}
Bob tells Muharto that his Dakota is stuck in the soft sand. Muharto rallies the hundreds of villagers who have gathered for the spectacle of the foreigner and his giant aircraft to tear apart their houses and use the woven bamboo walls as a makeship runway. The Dakata takes off with Muharto on board and heads to Jogja.
```

Arriving on the beach, Muharto learns his hunch was correct. Bob, a
large, pleasant-looking man in his mid twenties, greets Muharto with his
usual infectious optimism. He shows Muharto his Dakota, which, though
undamaged, is trapped in the soft sand. A Dutch aircraft had been
spotted out to sea a few hours before; Muharto knew that another could
pass overhead at any moment. He tells the assembled villages that Bob is
a friend who will help them in the struggle against the despised Dutch.
But first, he will need their help to get the aircraft off the beach
before spotted by a Dutch patrol. At Muharto's direction, the villagers
literally tear their own houses apart, laying the woven bamboo walls
along the sand to fashion a makeshift runway. The Dakota, with Muharto
on board, takes off and heads toward Jogja.As Muharto and Pang walk over
the soft sand toward the Dakota, Muharto can see that he was correct. It
is Bob Freeberg, who is digging the sand from around one of the wheels.
Muharto sees that the Dakota is undamaged but stuck in the soft sand.
They first try to fashion a runway from coconut fronds, but the leaves
disintegrate under the wheels of the heavy Dakota. Buy this time
hundreds of villagers had arrived to witness the outlandish spectacle.
Muharto looks around the village, and notices that most houses have
walls of woven bamboo. He gets an idea, climbs with Bob onto the wing of
the Dakota, and launches into an impassioned speech saying that this
brave foreigner is our friend and will help us drive the despised Dutch
from our land. The villagers cheer, and Muharto is joined by Pang, the
army officer, who tells the assembled crowd to, literally, tear their
own houses apart to lay the bamboo mats on the sand. A few hours later,
the Dakota, which Muharto on board, takes off and flies away, the mats
flying backwards in the propeller backwash.
