---
category: present
date: 15 October 1947
status: rough
title: Weekend in Jogja

---


Cameron accompanies Muharto to visit the aviation museum, where relics from the RI-002 wreckage are kept. There first stop, however, is to a village on the
upper slopes of the Merapi volcano to meet Muharto's spiritual advisor,
Mbah Maridjan. The three hike the steep incline to a shrine;
effortlessly in the case of the sexagenarian duo of Muharto and
Maridjan; with some difficulty by their companion, some four decades
their junior. Cameron watches respectfully as the two intone Islamic
prayers, then lay Hindu-style floral offerings at the shrine to the gods
of the mountain.

Afterward, Muharto takes Cameron to the Air Force museum, a re-purposed
hanger filled with decommissioned aircraft and other exhibits. Muharto
points to a model of the Zogling training glider, and tells Cameron of
training village boys who had never seen an airplane to become skilled
pilots in mere weeks. Grinning, he tells of the time he flew one himself.

In the museum, Muharto seeks out the curator, who invites them into his
office. Muharto asks the curator to retrieve scraps from the RI-002
wreckage stored at the museum. One of the items is the dynamo with the
bullet inexplicably lodged in the windings. Muharto picks it up, and
from his point of view, the room around him fades into mist.

Muharto is astounded to realize he is somehow in the radio nook of
RI-002 on the day of the crash. The airplane shutters as the engines
scream in protest. Muharto sees two shadowy figures in the pilot seats,
and a forested mountainside fills the window.

The museum office comes back into focus, and Muharto sees the concerned
faces of Cameron and the curator. Muharto places the dynamo back into
the storage box and says, in a wavering voice, that they will miss their
train back to Jakarta if they don't hurry.
