n 1946, an American war ace pilot, working for regional air charter, pilots a humanitarian mission to the capital of the newly proclaimed Republic of Indonesia, isolated behind a Dutch blockade. Sensing a lucrative opportunity, he plans to convert a few of the hundreds of war-surplus aircraft stored in Manila to build he own air-charter company, with Indonesia as the main client. He purchases his won airplane, the first to be registered to the new nation, and provides an essential lifeline, with his won  keeping the new republic alive, his skill and courage wins him high praise and deep respect from all Indonesians, and forges close bonds with his Indonesian crew, and becoming a regional celebrity. But his efforts to establish a viable business with more airplanes are thwarted at every turn by the unreliable partners, constant financial worries caused by the Indonesian inability to pay for his services, and constant harassment by Dutch authorities,who view him as a criminal. In September 1948, suffering from exhaustion and with his aircraft falling apart from overuse, he disappears while transporting a load of Republican gold. 


In 1947, During the most critical period of Indonesia's struggle for independence from the Dutch after the Pacific War, a highly skilled American pilot provides an essential lifeline for the new nation. He wins high praise from all Indonesians and forms close bonds with his crew, but soon finds himself a pawn in the struggle among the Indonesian, Dutch, and American interests vying for control of the archipelago. His efforts to expand his operation are thwarted at every turn by unreliable partners and the inability of the Indonesian government to pay for his extraordinary services to their case. In September, driven to exhaustion, and his aircraft to near-ruin, he and his aircraft disappears while transporting a fortune in Republican gold. Reports of his aircraft landing at a Dutch air base spark speculation that he betrayed the Republic. In 1988, members of his former crew, aided by a Dutch journalist, attempt to solve the mystery, in the process revealing a devastating secret about foreign attempts to destroy the new nation.  