---
identifier: 27ba7b32
component: Characters
parent: Characters 
title: Main
---
• 22 years old. • Just graduated with degree in journalism. Favorite
professor who knows Sabam from Harvard arranged for one year internship
with Jakarta Post.\
• Cameron graduated with degree. Worked for local newspaper but unhappy
with trivial work and low pay. • Cameron worked in boiler room. College
drinking buddy got Cam a job as stock broker in US boiler room. Narrowly
escaped jail when company raided • Partially based on Paul Handley. •
Our reporter tells him "Any hack can get himself kicked out of the
country" • Cameron flees to Jakarta to live with sister working in
American bank invites him to use spare room in Kemang mansion until case
settles down. • Cameron meets Sabam at one of her parties. Invited to
join Post newsroom staff because of familiarity with both journalism and
financial matters to explain the deregulation packages of 1988. JP
gearing up to be reliable source of info for foreign investors as the
banks and capital markets are deregulated in 1988. • Cameron rides a
Harley Davidson he bought from a friend of Syd. • Dashing former
aviator, Based on Verspoor • Julia's favorite uncle. julia's mother's
sister married him. • Indo family, several generations • Was fighter
pilot in revolution. But would never talk about it. • Moved to
Netherlands after war • Comes to Indonesia every year, and always spends
considerable time with Julia • Flew Julia to Holland to study Dutch a
few years before. • Fighter squadron leader • Met Sita in Batavia in
1949 • Sita looked him up when she was studying engineering on a
colonial guilt scholarship. • After resigning commission, he and Sita
decided to resettle in Indonesia. • Resigned commission after revolution
even though had a promising career. • Worked odd jobs. So little govt
pension.

• Julia is from a priyayi family. • Only child, which is unusual in
Indonesia. So her father will give her anything she wants. • Envious of
all her anak jendral friends being able to take master's degrees in
America and Europe.

• Juila impressed by Ani. Tales of hardship and resilience in Jogja make
Julia think she can make a difference.

• Same background as Ani. Both from Jogja so distant connection between
families. This is when Julia's parents to not object to her traveling to
Jogja with Cameron is given permission to stay at Ani's sister's house.
• Julia got full scholarship to take degree at UI. Now working in
library both for credit and pocket money • Julia loves reading which is
rare in Indonesian women. Always saw her father reading. His job was to
read books for censorship. • Auntie Sita would bring her books from the
Netherlands, so she learned to read Dutch as well as English. • Got
position in library because of ability to read Dutch and English. •
Julia pushed to marry Cameron. Friends from OKB families. Pushing her to
marry Cameron for the perceived money of a bule. • Family pushes her to
marry Javanese guy. bobot, bibit, bebet • Though having no formal
library training, Julia's fluency in both Dutch and English, passion for
reading and a talent for organization were deemed sufficient
qualifications for this job. She is also informally the person delegated
to attending to foreign visitors.\
• First fight between Cameron and Julia is when he takes her to a Kemang
party and she is mistaken for a bar girl • • Muharto insists that he and
Bob were close friends. • Muharto has tidy home in southern suburbs.
Full of Javanese bric a brac. • Initially Muharto does not mention Ining
because the memory is painful. Bio • Trained at Harvard • founding
editor of post • left in 91 to become Ambassador to Australia • Model •
Based on partially on Syd Perret and David Jardine. • Wicked sense of
humor. Background • Syd is a washed out old Asia hand, former foreign
correspondent • Syd crusading journo, high ideals in his day. • Syd
Arrived in HK in the 60s on a boat like John McBeth. • Syd settled in
Indonesia after marrying an Indonesian woman he knocked up. • Now
divorced and penniless. Jakarta Post • Syd is a good copy editor, works
cheap, always shows up. So Sabam must keep Syd instincts in check. This
is difficult, as he is the last person to see the copy before it goes to
the press.\
• OR speaks fluent Javanese and thoroughly familiar with Jakarta bahasa
gaul and allusion • Always trying to sneak Pos Kota sex-crime
translations into Post when Sabam is preoccupied. Running gag. • Sabam
cannot fire him because his knowledge of Indonesian culture enables him
to pick up potentially damaging references that have escaped the new
recruits. Comes out in session with sabam in lapo. • Sabam often confers
with Syd in office. Syd advises him on reporting government corruption
scandal. • Cam always asks how you get away with it. Syd only smiles.
Behavior • Syd lives in room in Jalan Jaksa like David Jardine. • Syd
encourages Julia to read. • Syd Fluent in both proper indonesian and
slang, which he used to use in previous job.

Assisting Cameron • Tells Cameron of CIA involvement in Suharto coup. •
Connection with Boedi: Used to visit once a month to listen to classical
music on the MacIntosh tube amp /quad speaker setup Boedi bought in
Spain.

Boediardjo . So go for it, but be careful. Syd suggests he start his
investigations by visiting Boediardjo, the RI-002 radio operator. Boedi
had been the Minister of Information when Syd was first posted to
Jakarta as a foreign correspondent in the early 1970s. Their
professional association ----- Boedi would personally approve all
foreign journalist visas ----- and their shared love of classical music
led to an amiable, mutually respectful acquaintance.

Journalism Career • Victor investigated Spoor coup • Victor was obsessed
with Spoor, regarded him as a wannabe king like Rajah Brooke. •
appearance of RI-002, but was stonewalled by the Dutch officials, who
insisted they knew nothing. Walter Foote betrays Bob • BN staff knew
more than they let on In Library • Julia introduces Cameron to Victor.
Says he is always there. • Chronic skin condition from confinement. Like
the cold climate of the newspaper archive. • Victor helps Julia with
obscure Dutch vocabulary in newspapers. • On visit to library, Julia
points out Victor. Says he is here at least one day a week.

Background

KNIL conscript talented artist and photographer worked for mapping
department attended art exhibits so met progressive Dutch and educated
Indonesians flew to Karangendah to map area Spoor used him as
documentary photographer. Blended into the background, saw encounters
like the friendly meetings of Spoor and Walter Foote. Walked away from
KNIL in chaotic period between independence and disbandment. Immediately
applied for and received Indonesian citizenship. Victor works in Spoors
offer as photo documenter. Desk right outside and overhears al lot. •
Was accused as communist and jailed. Released in 1980. Not able to work.
