---
identifier: a67a82b5
component: Characters
parent: Characters 
title: Interviewees
---
• Cameron meets Affandi in Jogja. Deeply affected when taken into back
room to see • Cameron loves resting guerilla. • Agus speaks Dutch. Agus
did not tell anyone that he speaks Dutch, so overheard officers plan to
take the gold, buy guns, and sell them back to the rebels. No word about
a coup. It was all about corruption. • Agus stole food. He stole other
practical goods from the Dutch, and kept doing it under the Armyas Mess
boy, invisible. • Agus is a preman. part of Outlaw culture in South
Sumatra . • Agus friends smuggled guns across Dutch territory to
Republican forces in Lampung.\
• Agus was Mess boy at karangendah during 40s ☐ How do they find out
about Agus?

• Ani has noblesse oblige. Ani and her mother help to organize food for
the refugees flooding into Jogja. • Ani teaches school. With no
resources save a blackboard and half piece of chalk. • Ani tells wedding
guests to wear shabby clothes with pride. • Ani endures hardships in
preparing for marriage • Ani bests Westerling when detained in market
during Operation Crow

Wiki bio Introduction through Syd. • Boedi interviewed surrounded by
Affandi paintings • Boedi serves Cameron buntil, from mother's recipe. •
Boedi hangs out with Aviation Brotherhood. • Boedi started on First
Flight. On every mission until after Soekarno Tour. • Boedi mentions
that when not resting or working on his plane, Freeberg would be writing
letters home. • Boedi strives to improve his (already adequate) English
by hanging out with members of the Aviation Brotherhood, who enjoy his
company. The pilots of the Aviation Brotherhood are reluctant to accept
the stiff and reserved Muharto, but the charismatic Boedi is welcomed
into the fold.\
• Tells Cameron that, even when telephones are available, anyone can
drop in at the 4 pm visiting hour and he will receive them. Old Javanese
custom. This will be important later, and also give Cameron a chance to
meet other visitors.

Bio • Change name and other details to deal with fact that George died
ten years before. • George writes to Dave Fowler, who was in the
indonesian aviation industry until 1956, and during the New Order until
1980. • George introduces story of Ining, which much surprises Cameron.
• Julius was Spoors adjudant. As KNIL officer adjutant to Spoor • Julius
not a confidant. Spoor cannot confide. All in Tahija as he is Indonesian
at heart. • Julius witnesses Spoor daily duties., Westerling, and the
colonial government. • Julius still running Caltex when Cam interviews
him. • Julius raised money for Freeport. And was Chairman of the Board.
Tahija worked to get best possible deal for Indonesians when working
with foreign scoundrels. • Julius tells Cameron that much of his career
has been spent keeping foreign investors on line. At the end Cameron
asks about his time with spoor. Saying he had come across his readings.
Julius grins saying no one likes to talk about that any more.

Bio Sudaryono is Adisucipto's younger brother • Sudaryono saw VT-CLA
crash . Cameron meets Alex. Cameron mentions his suspicions about
Kopassus and gold. Alex angrily says: "My boys are killers, not thieves"
Then tells Cameron to be careful. The authorities already know what you
are doing. But you are too insignificant to bother with...yet. Reveals
that Spoor called off attack on POAS journalists flight Mentions that
Karangendah was Palembang II. 40 years ago these guys were shopkeepers.
They still look like it. Guy sitting outside a diesel parts shop does a
ten million sales a year. So they are easy picking s for the scammers.
Bruce rappapprt and sutowo.
