---
identifier: 219e8aa7
component: Characters
parent: Characters 
title: Historical
---
• Bambang born in village. • Bambang brash and overly confident in
abilities.

1.  Walters Tells Boedi stories of Dave Fowler and Rick Cobley
2.  Walters badmouths Freeberg to Boediarjo. Insists Freeberg is a
    cheat.
3.  Walters acts unhinged throughout the latter half of 1947. • George
    looks after Ining • June begs Bob to return to US. \"These people
    own you nothing. They are just using you. • Head of Philippine army
    intel • Assigned by Roxas as liaison with RI through Muharto and
    Pang • Virulent anti-communist • Close ties with American intel,
    including the newly formed CIA. Flight attendant of the three CALI
    blockade runs Boedi runs into her while having coffee (in a
    respectable coffee shop) with another pilot.

☐ Stories Miss Brown can tell about CALI blockade runs and other pilots.
• Moeljono is an ace pilot. • Moeljono Friendly rival to Bambang
Moeljono • Moeljono handsome. Like Gary Grant. Suave and charming. •
Moeljono is given the prime assignment. Piloting the Hayabusa bomber for
the Ambarrawa Raid. • Moeljono selected to relocate RI-005 from
Bukittinggi to Jogjakarta. Bio • Spoor concerned about gun running. •
Spoors orders operation product • Spoor Furious at Bob over Ining
incident. Vows to crack down on gun running • Spoor has reservations
about Westerling • Spoor learns about KNIL corruption. The irony that
his own officers were the gun runners. • Suryadarma Chief of Staff of
AURI • Suryadarma Treats foreign pilots flying RI-00x registration like
his own AURI pilots. Demands military chain of command. This puts him at
serious odds with Aviation Brotherhood. • Suryadarma has sense of
entitlement • Tom Lee is an American government lawyer and suspected
intelligence asset. • Tom Lee advises Bob that deporting Walters would
be a bad move. • Muharto raises suspicion about Lee with Chrysler story.
• At the end revealed that Lee was only a lawyer.

• Foote is pro-Dutch American consul in Batavia • Shares Spoor's view
that Indonesians cannot govern a nation. • Worked closely with OSS
during Operation Rust with Robert Koke • Like to be called Uncle Billy.
Treated Indonesians, including Hatta and Sjahrir as errant nephews. •
Affable but considered a lightweight Harley riding painter, graphic
designer Center of Batavia Kuntskring Crush on Emiria Jealous of Victor.
Undermines victor be getting word to Spoor that Victor is meeting with
Republicans through Emiria. • Bob is a straight shooter. Others seduced
by the easy life in the east. Bob compares Lives of expats in Manila
contrasted to deprivation in jogja • Bob is haggard. Grey hairs at 27. •
Bob is responsible for crew. Insists that as captain of RI-002 he is
responsible for them until they return to Java As they wait for the
verdict. • Bob handles petty annoyances. Handles the little problems
with his apartment and room mates, his jeep etc with a sort of gruff
good nature.\
• Bob shows his appreciation for local customs when Boedi's mothers
buntil becomes his favorite dish. • Experienced guerrilla with
Philippines army. • Party animal • Arrogant and easy to offend •
drinking problem made worse by isolation • Muharto organized the deal
with Primitivo, so, as in the Indonesian fashion, is responsible for him
• Brings him whiskey on every flight to keep him happy.
