---
identifier: 82844030
component: Investigation
parent: Orphan 
title: Investigation
---
• Muharto reads of crash site discovery in 1977 • 1. Muharto researches
in AURI and other collections. Finds only disorder and obstruction as
librarians make life difficult. • Investigation report asks more
questions than it answers. • American embassy helps with records • Photo
of dynamo with bullet in windings • Sulaiman and team investigate
wreckage • Find empty crates of gold • Find dynamo with bullet • •
Muharto tries to contact Sulaiman but gets no answer • Old Auri
classmate claim no knowledge • Victor Panggebean evasive Syd suggests
Cameron meet Boedi , He was head of Deppen when Syd was bureau chief for
a wire service, so they often interacted. and bonded on shared interest
in art and classical music.

a foreign correspondent who gently teases Muharto, and tells amusing
stories of being stranded in Manila with Aviation Brotherhood.

Tells of

Boedi tells of initial missions with Bob, and how he loved his mother's
buntil.

The ongoing saga of Bob's suits.

Boedi has fond recollection of the party thrown by Salipada Penatun to
celebrate the sale of the quinine.

Bob finally bought new suits, as well as the Olds for his parents. After
purchasing the supplies ordered by Suryadarma, Muharto and Boedi shopped
for clothes for their fellow officers.

The last memory was Muharto taking Tom Lee for a meal, and insisting he
pay, over Tom's strenuous suggestions.

In the present day, Budi jokes to Muharto about the "company" expense
account. Muharto jokes that he might be right. as he visited Tom years
later and found his wife driving a luxury convertible. Cameron admires
the Affandi collection. Boedi suggests he go to the museum if in Jogja.
Victor tells of the Dutch side of the RI-002 story, the almost comical
interviews with Dutch officials who were driven to distraction by
Freeberg's blockade runs. Cameron receives photocopies of letters from
the Freeberg family. Reveal that Bob never mentioned Muharto by name. •
Cameron receives Freeberg letters from family. Freeberg never mentioned
Muharto. learns that, despite his view as being Freeberg's close friend,
Bob never mentions him or the other Indonesian crew. Only casually as:
"My boys" • Muharto goes into trance holding dynamo. He is in rear of
flight deck. Looks forward to see two silhouetted figures in pilot
seats. • Hadi stealing necklace at Tanjung Betutu • Ibu Santoso's
experience at Tanjung karang ceremony • Hadi tells of stealing fathers
necklace from casket when guard's back was turned. Muharto goes into
trance holding necklace. He is in co-pilot seat. turns to left to see
Bambang in pilot's chair. Victor arranges for Cameron to interview Frank
Reuneker. Like Victor, George was an indo who sided with the Republic.
But unlike Victor, George went on to found an aviation company, which
flourished servicing the foreign oil companies in remote regions.

Frank tells him of struggles with Ining, After the interview Frank
promises to write to Dave Fowler. Cameron interviews Boedi again, after
first giving him the painting from Affandi. Boedi knows Affandi to be an
excellent judge of character, and so warms to Cameron. He tells him all
the details left out of previous conversations. Ining's death, and
Muharto interrogated by Primitivo 16. Victor suggests Cameron talk to
Julius Tahija. Cameron uses his JP credentials to interview Tahija
without Sabam's knowledge. 1. Julia finds photo of RI-002 at
Karangendah. 2. Cameron is convinced answers lie in Karangendah. Cameron
talks Julia into coming with him to check it out. 3. Cameron and Julia
are introduced to Agus. 4. Agus tells of seeing Santoso with the others
in detention. 5. Agus sneaks Cameron and Julia onto Karangendah tank
base. Have to dodge tanks on maneuver. 6. Agus reveals that gold was
used to purchase guns smuggled from Malaya, which then taken overland to
Lampung by Sumatra preman.
