---
identifier: d7105679
component: Moments
parent: Orphan 
title: Moments
---
• RI-002 lands on Sumatran runway at night, lit only by two lines of
obor, bamboo and coconut oil torches. • Republic fears a move by the
Dutch in the coming months, and so are planning to move all valuable
assets to Bukittinggi. 1. Compare with rags worn in Jogja and
Muharto/Boedi going on shopping trips in Manila and Singapore. • They
all stay with Ani's sister and husband. Cameron and Julia are,
pointedly, given separate rooms at opposite ends of the house. This can
be quite funny, with Julia being given a nice room overlooking the
garden, while Cameron is led through a labyrinth to a windowless
servant's quarters, the sister apologizing profusely all the way. Syd
does not show up for work. Cameron drops by Syd's shabby room in Jalan
jaksa and finds him dead in his favorite reading chair. Bob and Muharto
return to Jogjakarta, Bob takes a holiday, swimming in Kaliurang After
finally being paid for the quinine, Bob pays his bills and sends money
home to buy an Oldsmobile for his parents. Muharto invites Tom Lee for
dinner to pay him back for all of his generosity. Boedi tells him not to
bother, as he is sure that all the drinks and dinner of last August was
"on the company expense account" Cameron mentions paratrooper story.
Boedi replies: He wasn't there. That's not how it happened. Bob does not
confront his partner directly, but instead makes discreet inquiries. He
is directed to a small airfield on the outskirts of Manila. He relocates
the disputed aircraft himself, choosing another airfield with a short
runway hemmed in by houses. Only a pilot with Bob's exceptional skill
could land a large Dakota there.
