---
identifier: 4d1c883c
component: Stories
parent: Orphan 
title: Stories
---
Attends art exhibitions and writes reviews for BN. Spoor often kids him
about this. Calls him the Dutch equivalent artsy fartsy Does review of
Emiria's show. she contacts him and invites him to her studio, where, on
another visit, she seduces him. Spoor cautions Victor about his affair
with Emiria. Spoor transfers Victor to infantry in early September.
Victor is certain that he wanted Victor out of the way because he was
making preparations for coup in concert with communists.

• Victor reviews Emiria exhibition. She contacts friend at BN and gets
return address. Is surprised when this turns out to be Poolweg barracks.
Now one at BN had any idea. Invites Victor to her studio. • 1. During a
party in the hotel in Bukittinggi, Cobley accuses Bob of monopolizing
Republican missions. Says he is taking the best business for himself,
especially since he is now "running narcotics". 2. Cobley secretly flies
exiled communist cadres into a lake near the town of Madiun. 3.
Suryadarma takes away Fowlers fuel allowance. Dave resolves it by going
over Suryadarma's head, to Hatta.

5.  While flying a group of international journalists to Jogja under
    cover of darkness, Fowler believes he spots fighter planes tailing
    him while his radio operator hears traffic on Dutch military
    frequencies. When he looks again, the fighters are gone.

6.  Fowler refuses request from Suryadarma to transport a quarter ton of
    gold to Bukittinggi, thinking the job is too dangerous after his
    near miss with the journalists. • Bob arrives in Manila in
    July 1946. He immediately is hired by CALI as a charter pilot. • Bob
    partners with Hugh Savage, a Singapore-based expat to start
    Southeastern Airlines. • Bob orders suits from back home to suit his
    new role as businessman. With the shortage of textiles cheaper to
    order from US. .\
    • Bob Freeberg joins with Bob Walters to purchase a war-surplus
    Dakota. • Bob returns to Manila from the CALi run to Jogja and
    discovers that the jointly owned Dakota is missing. • Bob learns
    that his partner Hugh Savage has done nothing to start Southeastern
    airlines. Savage complains that Walter's constant defamations had
    soured potential investors.\
    • Bob sues Walters to force him to come to an arrangement about the
    Dakota. Walters does not attend the court hearing, so instead Bob
    asks the judge if he can use the Dakota for charter runs until the
    next court date. The judge agrees. • Bob flies to Java with two
    mechanics and make emergency landing on beach. • At the party to
    celebrate the payment for the quinine, Salipada Penatun offers to
    have Walters deported. Tom Lee suggests that such a move would have
    unintended consequences. Bob thanks Penatun for his offer, but says
    they should just put everything behind them.\
    • 3. Suryadarma orders Bob to transport several tons of Republican
    opium to Bukittinggi. • 4. Immediately after returning from the
    Soekarno Tour, Suryadarma orders him Bob to Sumatra on another
    mission. Bob flatly refuses.\

7.  Bob returns from a six-week layover in Manila with both pilot and
    aircraft in good shape.

8.  Suryadarma takes away Bob's fuel allowance.

9.  RI-002 drops leaflets over Madiun. Santoso is valuable in pointing
    out neighborhoods where residents may be receptive to message from
    government to stay loyal to the Republic.\

10. • On his final trip to Singapore, Bob learns that Hugh Savage has
    filed for bankruptcy of Southeast Airlines.

11. Suryadarma assigns Bob mission to transport gold to Bukittinggi

12. Sabam assigns interview with Muharto because Cameron keeps pestering
    him to do a story.

13. Muharto tells Cameron of some of his adventures with RI-002,
    praising Bob and glossing over the unpleasant parts.

14. Cameron goes to the library and reads Recruit to revolution.

15. Cameron and Julia go to the canteen for coffee.

16. Sabam tells Cameron that Muharto was delighted with the story.

17. Muharto shows Cameron the disappointing and confusing results of his
    researches.

18. Julia introduces Cameron to Victor.

19. Muharto and Cameron go to Jogja. In the morning they visit Mbak
    Marijan at his village near the crater of Mount Merapa, where
    Muharto makes offerings.

20. They then go the the museum, where Muharto falls into trance.

21. Sabam asks Cameron to write deep background stories on dereg by
    interviewing other foreigners.

22. Cameron becomes convinced that the newly formed CIA supported Walter
    Foote and Spoor in their first attempt at regime change. "This is
    where it all started"

23. Sabam is furious at Cameron for interviewing Tahija without
    authorization.

24. Sabam invites Cam and Syd to his favorite lapo after a disturbing
    phone call from deppen.

25. Sabam has no choice but to fire Cameron and has his visa canceled,
    effective immediately.

26. Petit Muharto sits at desk in a bungalow at Maguwo air base in
    Jogjakarta, shuffling papers and regarding the action on the runway.

27. Muharto sees an opportunity to escape his desk work buy accepting an
    invitation to accompany a friend to Australia on business.
    Suryadarma reluctantly lets him go, but orders him to make as many
    aviation contacts as he can.

28. Muharto negotiates a deal with CALI, an air-charter company based in
    the Philippines, to fly to humanitarian supplies to Jogjakarta. The
    flight lands in the middle of an air show, to the delight of the
    crowd.

29. Bob Freeberg is the pilot of the third CALI blockade run.

30. On the return leg, Muharto asks Bob to perform tasks more suited to
    a military mission that a commercial charter flight. Nevertheless,
    Bob readily agrees to test land at a refurbished wartime jungle air
    strip and to drop paratroopers over a highland town.

31. Muharto gets a surprise call from Pang in Tasik.

32. Muharto flies to tasik and is driven to the beach to meet Bob
    Freeberg. Muharto organizes villagers to build bamboo runway

33. Suryadarma promotes Muharto to major and assigns him to desk duties
    at Maguwo.

34. Boedi talks Bob into reconciling with Muharto.

35. Muharto is shocked and saddened when he hears reports that RI-002
    has vanished.

36. Ani and Muharto marry on a day marked by equal amounts and joy and
    sadness.

• Julia meets Cameron when he visits the reference section. He gives her
a ride on the vintage Harley Davidson to the Hotel Borobudur. • First
fight is when Cameron takes Julia to an expat party in Kemang, and she
is mistaken for a bar girl. • Julia goes ballistic and calls Cameron a
fucking bule just trying to rip us off. • In March 1946, one of a
handful of Indonesian aviators, Augustinus Adisucipto, flies a
reconditioned biplane left behind by the Japanese. • Bambang Saptoadji
messes up a landing during an air show in Bandung, severely damaging one
of the Republic's few serviceable aircraft. • Bambang is bitterly
disappointed when he discovers that the machine gun on his fighter is
not working. He can only watch in frustration as the other bombers and
fighters take off to bomb Dutch facilities on the North coast. • Bob
gives Bambang a flying lesson in RI-002 that runs into problems because
of Bambang's weak command of English. • Bambang cannot conceal his envy
of Moeljono when his fellow aviator flies the twin-engine RI-005
Avro-anson from Bukittinggi to Jogjakarta. • Muharto and Bambang argue
over who gets to sit in the right-hand seat. Muharto says it is his
right as mission leader. Bambang rejoins that Muharto cannot actually
fly. Bob and Boedi exchange wry glances as the two spat. • Bob is
annoyed when Bambang shows up late for opium run, forcing him to cancel
the mission. • With the reassignment of Muharto to headquarters, Bambang
gets his coveted permanent place in the right-hand seat. • During the
Soekarno tour, Bambang ingratiates himself with Soekarno in the hope of
being selected to fly RI-001. Boedi finds his efforts, and Soekarnos
condescending replies amusing. During the propaganda leaflet run over
Madiun, Bambang watches intently as Bob puts RI-002 through tree-top
maneuvers. Expression on his face reflects thoughts that he could do it
himself. Bambang decides to fly RI-002 back to Jogja, but crashes on
Mount Punggur.

• Ani's father questions Muharto's "demotion" from Lt Col. to Captain •
Ani serves rice to refugees. She has no idea what to do in kitchen,
never having been in one before. • Ani berates Muharto for trying to
learn to fly. Better to stick to a safe job as a bureaucrat, like his •
Ani berates Westerling when he and Muharto and stopped and searched on
the evening of Operation Crow. • Spoor relocates from Australia to
Batavia and takes command of KNIL. He hires Julius Tahija as his
adjutant. • Spoor hears alarming reports of gun running. He imposes a
tight an air and sea blockade around the entire archipelago. • As
recruits pour into Java, Spoor realizes that he cannot feed them all
with the limited agricultural resources of the Dutch-controlled
territories. He mobilizes the military in a lightning strike, seizing
agricultural land, ports, and oil fields. • Spoor is furious that Thai
authorities released Freeberg. • Spoor learns Ining is training
guerrillas. • Appeals to American consul Walter Foote to do something
about Freeberg. Though Foote also disagrees with Freeberg's actions, he
can do nothing. • Spoor learns of Manila newspaper report speculating
about Ining running guns. He issues a top-priority standing order to
find and bring down RI-002. • When he learns of the opium runs, Spoor
decides to consider Freeberg a major criminal, and orders his fighters
to use deadly force if they encounter RI-002. • Spoor orders a night
patrol not to engage a blockade running POAS flight because he is
informed that American and other civilians are passengers. • Dutch
troops invade Jogja, destroying the entire AURI air fleet and capturing
Nationalist leaders. • The mysterious death of KNIL Lt Arnolt prompts
Spoor to investigate rumors of corruption in the military. • Spoor dies
after a seafood lunch in which his dining companies also suffered food
poisoning.

1.  Major Primitivo introduces Muharto to Captain Ignacio Espina, a
    guerrilla who fought the Japanese occupation of the Philippines.
    Epina, nicknamed Ining, will accompany RI-002 back to Jogja, where
    he will transfer his guerrilla warfare skills to the young militia
    members of the Tentara Pelajar.
2.  At the party to celebrate the sale of the quinine and their return
    to Java, Ining shows himself to be a party animal, buying rounds for
    his companions flirting with the foreign women in the Aviation
    Brotherhood bar. When he hits on the teenage daughter of an American
    pilot, tempers flare, and Freeberg and Boedi have to hustle him out
    of the bar.
3.  Muharto sets up Ining at a house on the slopes of Mount Merapi, next
    to the forest where Ining will train students to become guerrilla
    fighters. They toast the occasion with whiskey brought from Manila.
4.  Muharto asks George to keep Ining company in Muharto's absence.
    George witnesses Ining berate the young recruits and sees the
    displeasure on their faces. Back in the house, Ining asks George to
    bring whiskey next time he visits.
5.  Ining writes a letter to Primitivo, but is seconds too late to give
    it to Muharto to take to Manila. George sees that Ining is upset.
    George is on active duty, so he asks Muharto's brother, Mas Ded, to
    look after Ining.
6.  During a routine radio contact with Jogja, Boedi is told that Ining
    and Mas Ded were found dead of gunshot wounds at Ining's house.
    Muharto reports the incident to Major Primitivo, who accuses Muharto
    of being a communist and Mas Ded being complicit in Ining 's death.
7.  An article in a Manila newspaper after Ining's funeral speculates
    that Ining's death resulted from an arms deal gone disastrously
    wrong.

Arrival in Indonesia • Victor marches off troop ship with other recruits
• Made a point of learning Indonesian and teaching other recruits during
voyage. Picks up Indonesian language newspaper in Medan and manages to
read it. Commandant noted this. • After training Victor is assigned to
intel department. Spoor notices him and puts him in his office as
low-level administrative worker.

Arts Critic • Victor visits kuntskring events. Submits articles to BN
and are accepted and requests for more.

• Emeria pressures Victor to report on Spoor's coup attempt. • Spoor
assigns Victor to Westerling. • Victor watches Ani berate Westerling. •
Victor defects. He believes that Spoor is attempting a coup, and wants
none of it.
