---
identifier: 04992a52
component: Themes
parent: Orphan 
title: Themes
---
• Cameron is discouraged from investigating the possible Spoor coup. •
With the government trying to attract investment from the EU, annoying
the Dutch would be counterproductive. "Doing proper journalism in
Indonesia is like walking a tightrope," Syd says, "and I'm the safety
net." Syd then turns away and takes a metal flask from his desk drawer.
There is a slight tremor in his hand as he pours a splash from the flask
into his coffee, replaces the flask in his desk, and goes back to work.
Corruption is the real betrayer of the revolution. It is admirable to
fight for higher ideals, even if those ideals are wrong. Corruption is
the victory of the petty, the short term, personal advantage over
society. That is why it is called corruption, it corrodes from within.
Bob was a hero, but he died a tragic death. Not shot down by a brave
fighter pilot doing his duty. But wasting away in a squalid cell because
of money-grubbing criminal officers. • Sabam treating line between
truthful reporting and appeasing censors and advertisers • Every time
Cameron goes to office Sabam in on phone or has just go off of it •
Tells advertiser threatening to pull ads: Sorry, you have the wrong
extension. I'll put you through to advertising. • One time, Sabam is
white faced. Tells Cameron that the JP was almost shut down over
reporting `<habibie warship>`{=html} story • Contrast: • Julia trying to
decide who to marry with Ani struggling for survival • Shopping in mall
for household goods with Halim smuggling dishes and cutlery • Worried
about clothes for event with shabby dress at Muharto's wedding Operation
Iceberg • Americans looked to NEI as a bulwark against Russia • CIA
precursor had big operation in Batavia in 1946 • Robert Koke, a top
operative with a history in NEI, went on to a four-decade career in the
new CIA.
